Carrie White, a shy and friendless 17-year-old girl, is the scapegoat and outcast of her school in North Carolina.
At home, she is abused by her mentally unstable mother Margaret, who is a Christian fundamentalist.

While in the showers after gym class, Carrie unexpectedly experiences her abnormally delayed first period.
Having no prior knowledge of menstruation, Carrie believes she is bleeding to death.
The other girls, including Chris Hargensen and Sue Snell, add to her shame and humiliation by pelting her with tampons and sanitary pads.
The gym teacher Miss Collins intervenes and as Carrie becomes more frantic, a light bulb bursts in the showers.

Miss Collins brings Carrie to the principal's office to excuse her from gym class for the next week.
After Carrie grows angry from the principal repeatedly mispronouncing her name "Cassie" instead of "Carrie", an ashtray on his desk suddenly flips onto the floor, startling Miss Collins.
As Carrie walks home a boy on a bicycle taunts her, calling her "Creepy Carrie".
When Carrie glares at him, the boy immediately crashes and hurts himself.
At home, Margaret receives a call from Miss Collins about the shower incident.
Margaret tells Carrie that the "curse of blood" is divine punishment for sin and forces her to confess before locking her into a dark and cramped prayer closet to pray for forgiveness.
A vengeful Carrie stares at her bedroom mirror until it shatters.

The next day, the other students laugh at her when she says that classmate Tommy Ross' poem is "beautiful".
Miss Collins subjects Carrie's P.E.
class to a week-long boot-camp-style detention, threatening the students with suspension from school and the prom if they do not attend.
Chris becomes defiant and is slapped by Miss Collins; Chris storms out, unremorseful of her prom ban, angrily swearing vengeance.
Sue convinces Tommy to invite Carrie to the prom.

Carrie suspects she may have telekinesis.
While researching in the library, Tommy invites her to the prom, but she declines, fearing another trick.
Miss Collins asks Carrie what's wrong and says that Tommy asked her out, fearing another trick.
Miss Collins then convinces Carrie that she's pretty and later reprimands Sue and Tommy as they try to convince her that they're trying to help Carrie.
Tommy later visits Carrie's house and repeats his invitation, which she eventually accepts.
Carrie tells her mother she is going to the prom, but Margaret declares the prom a sinful occasion.
Carrie reveals her telekinesis by causing all the windows to slam shut, leading Margaret to believe she is a witch.
Carrie insists on going to the prom and Margaret reluctantly accepts.

Chris tells her delinquent boyfriend Billy Nolan that she wants revenge on Carrie.
She goes with Billy and some of his friends to a local farm, where Billy and his friends bloodily slaughter pigs and store the pigs' blood in a bucket.
Billy then sneaks into the school and places the bucket above the school's stage.
As Carrie prepares for the evening, her mother tries to discourage her from going to the prom, claiming that "They're all gonna laugh at you!"
Carrie's classmates are surprised to see her at the prom and several girls point and snicker.
After Miss Collins comforts her with stories of her own prom, Carrie begins to enjoy herself and dances blissfully with Tommy, who gives her a first kiss.
Sue, who was unable to attend due to lacking a date, sneaks into the prom to ensure everything goes well for Carrie.

To Carrie's surprise but according to Chris and Billy's plan, she and Tommy are named prom king and queen.
As the two approach the stage, Sue discovers Chris holding a rope attached to the bucket.
Before Sue can warn Carrie, Miss Collins forces her out, thinking Sue came to cause trouble.
The crown is placed on Carrie's head, then Chris pulls the rope and Carrie is drenched in the pig's blood.
Chris and Billy escape the gym laughing, as Tommy is knocked unconscious by the falling bucket.
Carrie hallucinates that the whole room is laughing at her in mass hysteria.

Carrie snaps into a cold rage and telekinetically seals the exits.
She then manipulates a fire hose and it blasts several students to their deaths at a tremendous force.
She also kills Miss Collins by separating her from the group.
She pins her to the wall and makes the basketball court collapse and swing onto Miss Collins, dismembering her as the horrified and helpless Chris and Billy witness from a window.
The water makes contact with the wiring, igniting a massive fire in the gym, killing all of the students and staff.

Carrie leaves the inferno in the gym and begins walking home, covered in blood.
Chris and Billy attempt to run Carrie over with Billy's car, but Carrie telekinetically flips the car over and causes it to explode, killing them in revenge.
Upon returning home and taking a bath to wash off the pig's blood, Carrie prepares for bed, but encounters Margaret and breaks down in her arms.
Margaret confesses to Carrie that she and her husband Ralph believed that sex was a sin and abstained from it, until he got drunk one night and raped her, which she admits that she actually enjoyed.
She embraces Carrie as the two recite the Lord's Prayer together, but halfway through the prayer, Margaret stabs Carrie in the back with a butcher's knife.
Carrie falls down the stairs and is cornered in the kitchen by a crazed Margaret, who attempts to stab her more.
Carrie's telekinesis is adrenalized, and all the knives and sharp objects in the kitchen are sent hurtling into her mother, crucifying her in the doorway.
Carrie screams and unhooks her mother as the house starts to shake, which then collapses onto them.

Some time later, Sue, the sole survivor of the prom massacre, has a dream in which she visits the lot where Carrie's house once stood.
As she places flowers on the ground, Carrie's bloody hand shoots out of the ground and grabs her elbowthen Sue wakes up screaming in her mother's arms, and presumably haunted forever by Carrie.

