A woman identifying herself as Evelyn Mulwray hires private investigator J. J.
"Jake" Gittes to carry out surveillance on her husband, Hollis I. Mulwray, chief engineer for the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power.
Gittes tails him, hears him publicly oppose the creation of a new reservoir, and shoots photographs of him with a young woman, which are published on the front page of the following day's paper.
Upon his return to his office, Gittes is confronted by a beautiful woman who, after establishing that the two of them have never met, irately informs him she is the real Evelyn Mulwray and that he can expect a lawsuit.

Realizing he was set up, Gittes figures whoever did it wants to get Mr. Mulwray, but, before he can question the husband, Lieutenant Lou Escobar fishes Mulwray, drowned, from a freshwater reservoir.
Under retainer to Mrs. Mulwray, Gittes investigates his suspicions of murder and notices that, although huge quantities of water are released from the reservoir every night, the land is almost dry.
Gittes is warned off by Water Department Security Chief Claude Mulvihill and a henchman, who slashes Jake's nose.
Back at his office, he receives a call from Ida Sessions, who identifies herself as the bogus Mrs. Mulwray.
She is afraid to identify her employer but provides a clue: the name of one of "those people" is in that day's obituaries.

Gittes learns that Mrs. Mulwray's late husband was once the business partner of her wealthy father, Noah Cross .
Over lunch at his personal club, Cross offers to double Gittes's fee to search for Mulwray's missing mistress, plus a bonus if he succeeds.
Gittes visits the hall of records, where he discovers that a large amount of acreage in the "Northwest Valley" has changed ownership.
While investigating there he is attacked by angry landowners; they believe he is an agent of the water department, attempting to force them out by sabotaging their water supply.

Gittes's review of the obituaries uncovers that a former resident of the Mar Vista Inn retirement home is one of the valley's new landowners, who purchased the property a week after his death.
He infers that Mulwray was murdered when he learned that the new reservoir would be used to irrigate the newly-purchased properties.
Evelyn and Gittes bluff their way into Mar Vista and confirm that the real estate deals are surreptitiously completed in the names of some of its residents.
After fleeing from Mulvihill and his thugs, they hide at Evelyn's house, where they nurse each other's wounds and end up in bed together.

Early in the morning, Evelyn has to leave suddenly; she warns Gittes that her father is dangerous and crazy.
Gittes follows her car to a house where he spies her through the windows with Mulwray's mistress.
He accuses Evelyn of holding her against her will, but she confesses that the woman is her sister.

The next day, an anonymous call draws Gittes to Ida Sessions's apartment; he finds her murdered, with Escobar waiting for his arrival.
Escobar pressures him because the coroner's report found salt water in Mulwray's lungs, indicating that the body was moved after death.
Escobar suspects Evelyn of the murder and insists Gittes produce her quickly or he'll face charges of his own.

Gittes returns to Evelyn's mansion.
There, he discovers a pair of bifocals in her salt water garden pond and finds her servants packing her bags.
His suspicions aroused, he confronts Evelyn about her "sister", whom she then claims is her daughter, Katherine.
Gittes slaps her repeatedly until she cries out "She's my sister and my daughter!
", then tearfully asks Gittes if it is "too tough" for him to understand what happened with her father.
She points out that the eyeglasses are not her husband's, as he did not wear bifocals.

Gittes makes plans for the two women to flee to Mexico.
He instructs Evelyn to meet him at her butler's home in Chinatown.
Gittes summons Cross to the Mulwray home to settle their deal for the girl.
Cross admits his intention to annex the Northwest Valley into the City of Los Angeles, then irrigate and develop it.
Gittes produces Cross's bifocals a link to Mulwray's murder.
Mulvihill appears and confiscates the glasses, then forces Jake to drive him with Cross to the women.

When the three reach the Chinatown hiding place, the police are already there and detain Gittes.
Evelyn will not allow Cross to approach Katherine, and when he is undeterred she shoots him in the arm and drives away with Katherine.
As the car speeds off, the police open fire, killing Evelyn.
Cross clutches Katherine and leads her away, while Escobar orders Gittes released, along with his associates.
One of them urges "Forget it, Jake.
It's Chinatown."

