Jackie Brown is a flight attendant for a small Mexican airline, the latest step down for her career, since she used to work for larger airlines.
To make ends meet, she smuggles money from Mexico into the United States for Ordell Robbie, a black-market gun runner living in the Los Angeles area under the ATF's close watch, forcing him to use couriers.

Ordell learns that another of his couriers, Beaumont Livingston, has been arrested.
Assuming that Livingston will become an informant in order to avoid jail time, Ordell arranges for bail with bondsman Max Cherry, then coaxes Livingston into a car trunk and murders him.

Acting on information Beaumont had indeed shared, ATF agent Ray Nicolette and LAPD detective Mark Dargus intercept Jackie as she returns to the United States with Ordell's cash and some cocaine that Brown was unaware was stashed in her bag.
Initially refusing to cut a deal, she is sent to jail on possession of drugs with intent to distribute.
Sensing that Jackie may also now be a threat to inform, Ordell goes back to Max to arrange her bail.

Max arrives to pick up Jackie at the jail, and he begins to develop an attraction to her.
He offers to buy her a drink and help explain her legal options.
Ordell later arrives at Jackie's house intending to murder her to prevent her from informing on him.
She surprises him by pulling a gun that she surreptitiously took from Max's glove compartment.
Jackie negotiates a deal with Ordell to pretend to help the authorities while smuggling in $550,000 of Ordell's money, enough to allow him to retire.

To carry out this plan, Ordell is counting on Melanie Ralston, a surfer girl with whom he lives and who has little ambition past smoking marijuana and watching TV, and Louis Gara, a friend and former cellmate.
He also intends to use a naive Southern girl, Sheronda .
Unaware of Jackie's and Ordell's plan to smuggle in $550,000, Nicolette and Dargus devise a sting to catch Ordell during the transfer of $50,000.
Unbeknownst to all, Jackie plans to double-cross everyone and keep $500,000 for herself.
She recruits Max to assist with her plan and offers him a cut.

After a trial run, the stage is set for the actual event.
In the Del Amo Mall, Jackie enters a dressing room to try on a new suit.
She has told Ordell that she will swap bags there with Melanie, supposedly passing off the $550,000 under the nose of Nicolette, who has been told that the exchange is to take place in the food court.
Instead, the bag she gives Melanie contains only $50,000 and the rest is left behind in the dressing room for Max to pick up.
Jackie then feigns despair as she calls Nicolette and Dargus out from hiding, claiming Melanie took all the money and ran.

In the parking lot, Melanie mocks Louis until he loses his temper and shoots her.
Louis confesses this to Ordell, who in turn asks Louis why he shot Melanie and if she is really dead.
Ordell grows even angrier when he discovers that most of the money is gone, and he realizes that Jackie is to blame.
When Louis mentions that during the hand-off he saw Max Cherry in the store's dress department and thought nothing of it, Ordell kills him and leaves with the bag.
Ordell turns his anger toward Max, who informs him that Jackie is frightened for her life and is waiting in Max's office to hand over the money.
A menacing Ordell holds Max at gunpoint as they enter the darkened office.
Jackie suddenly yells that Ordell has a gun, and he is shot dead by Nicolette, who was hiding in another room.

Having had her charges dropped for cooperating the ATF, and now in possession of the money, as well as Ordell's car, Jackie decides to leave the country and travel to Madrid, Spain.
She invites Max to go along with her, but he declines, choosing his well-controlled and familiar life over an uncertain life with Jackie in Spain.
Jackie shares a meaningful moment with Max, kisses him goodbye, and leaves, as Max takes a phone call.
Moments later, Max cuts the call short and seems to contemplate his decision to stay behind as Jackie drives away.

