Robin Monroe, a New York journalist working for Dazzle, a fashion magazine, is invited by her boyfriend Frank to spend a week holidaying with him on the island paradise of Makatea, in the South Pacific.
The final leg of their journey to Makatea is in a small dilapidated aircraft, piloted by middle-aged American Quinn Norris.
They are accompanied by Quinn's girlfriend and co-pilot Angelica.

On their first night on the island, a drunk Quinn makes a move on Robin, which she rejects as Frank appears.
Later that night, Frank proposes to her and she happily accepts.

The next morning Robin is called away to Tahiti to supervise a fashion event.
She hires Quinn to fly her there, but a thunderstorm forces them to crash-land on a deserted island.
Initially believing they are on an island with a peninsula to the north, they climb a mountain to disable a beacon Quinn believes to be there.
They discover they are in fact on a different island with no beacon.
Fighting for survival on the island, they inadvertently become witnesses to South Asian pirates, who discover and chase them.

Meanwhile, after getting drunk and thinking that Robin is dead, Frank sleeps with Angelica after she seduces him.

After evading the pirates, Robin and Quinn are caught, but narrowly escape by jumping into the ocean from a cliff.
They camp next to the wreckage of a World War II Japanese plane.
Salvaging parts from it, they succeed in getting Quinn's plane airworthy again, and fly back to Makatea just in time for their funerals, as well as escaping the pirates, whose boat is destroyed.
Frank is very happy to see Robin alive, but is disgusted at himself for sleeping with Angelica and not being able to tell Robin about it.
Robin goes to the hospital where Quinn is recovering and tells him her feelings, but he rejects her.

Robin then decides to go back to New York with Frank, but at the airport in Tahiti she finds that she is unable to go.
Frank finally tells her he slept with Angelica and she tells him about her feelings for Quinn.
They decide they are not in love and she gives him back the engagement ring.

Quinn has a change of heart and rushes to the airport, but is too late to stop the plane.
He then encounters Robin getting off an airplane, having stopped the flight.
He walks up to her and they embrace and kiss each other.

