In 2047, the rescue vessel Lewis and Clark is dispatched to answer a distress signal received from the Event Horizon, a starship that disappeared during its maiden voyage to Proxima Centauri seven years prior.
Captain Miller and his crew Lieutenant Starck, Pilot Smith, Medical Technician Peters, Engineer Ensign Justin, Rescue Technician Cooper, and Trauma Doctor D.J.
are joined for the mission by the Event Horizon's designer, Dr. William Weir .
Dr. Weir briefs the crew, telling them that the Event Horizon was built to test an experimental gravity drive.
This drive generates an artificial black hole and uses its immense gravitational power to bridge two points in spacetime, greatly reducing travel time over astronomical distances.

Upon arriving at the ship's decaying orbit around Neptune and boarding the Event Horizon to search for survivors, the crew finds evidence of a massacre.
During the search, the ship's gravity drive activates automatically.
Justin is pulled into the resulting portal, returning in a catatonic state.
He is so terrified by what he witnesses during the crossover that he attempts suicide, after which he is placed in stasis.
The activation of the gravity drive causes a massive shock wave that critically damages the Lewis and Clark and forces the entire crew to board the Event Horizon.
The crew then begins experiencing hallucinations corresponding to their fears and regrets: Miller sees a subordinate, Corrick, he was forced to abandon in a zero gravity fire; Peters sees images of her son Denny with his legs covered in bloody lesions; and Dr. Weir, a widower, sees his wife Claire with missing eyes, urging him to join her.

The team soon discovers a video log of the Event Horizon's crew as they went insane and mutilated each other in a "blood orgy".
The video log ends with a shot of the Event Horizon's captain, who has apparently gouged out his own eyes, holding them up to the camera and saying in Latin, "liberate tuteme ex inferis" .
Miller and D.J.
deduce that the ship's gravity drive opened a gateway into a dimension outside the known universe.
Dr. Weir describes it as "a dimension of pure chaos, pure evil" which has given the Event Horizon a horrible telepathic sentience that torments its occupants and compels them to return to this hell.

Miller decides to destroy the Event Horizon despite objections from Dr. Weir, who is seduced and eventually possessed by the evil presence and who uses an explosive device from the Event Horizon to destroy the Lewis and Clark.
Smith is killed in the explosion and Cooper is propelled into space.
Peters dies from a long fall after being lured into the engineering section by an apparition of her son.
An eyeless Dr. Weir kills D.J.
by vivisecting him and corners Starck on the bridge.
Miller tries to rescue Starck but is caught by Dr. Weir, who activates the ship's gravity drive, initiating a ten-minute countdown, after which the Event Horizon and its passengers will return to the other dimension.
Cooper, having used his space suit's oxygen to propel himself back to the ship, tries to contact those inside, but Dr. Weir retaliates by shooting out the bridge window.
Dr. Weir is blown out into space by the ensuing decompression, while Miller, Starck, and Cooper survive and manage to seal off the bridge area of the ship.

Miller then resolves to detonate the explosives installed on the Event Horizon to split the ship in two and use the forward section of the ship as a lifeboat.
He is attacked by manifestations of Corrick and Dr. Weir, who shows Miller horrifying visions of the Lewis and Clark's crew being tortured and mutilated once they return to hell.
Miller fights off these visions and manages to detonate the explosives, sacrificing himself so that Justin, Cooper, and Starck can escape.
The gravity drive activates, pulling the rear of the ship into a wormhole.
Starck and Cooper join Justin in stasis and wait to be rescued.

Seventy-two days later, the Event Horizon is located by a rescue party who discover the remaining crew still in stasis.
A newly awakened Starck hallucinates that a scarred Dr. Weir is posing as one of the rescuers.
Cooper restrains the terrified Starck and one of the rescuers calls for a sedative as the doors close ominously.

