In post-Soviet Russia, civil war erupts as a result of armed conflict in Chechnya.
Military units, loyal to Russian ultra-nationalist Vladimir Radchenko, have taken control of a nuclear missile installation and are threatening nuclear war if either the American or Russian governments attempt to confront him.

A U.S. Navy ballistic missile submarine, the USS Alabama, is assigned to a patrol mission to be available to launch its missiles in a pre-emptive strike if Radchenko attempts to fuel his missiles.
Captain Frank Ramsey is the sub's commanding officer, one of few commanders left in the U.S. Navy with combat experience.
He chooses as his new executive officer Lieutenant Commander Ron Hunter, who has an extensive education in military history and tactics, but no combat experience.

During their initial days at sea, tension between Ramsey and Hunter becomes apparent due to a clash of personalities: Hunter is more analytical and cautious, while Ramsey is more intuitive and impulsive.
This becomes evident when Ramsey orders a mock missile launch drill while Hunter is tending to an out-of-control grease fire in the ship's galley.
Hunter eventually responds to the drill, but not before hesitation due to disagreement.
The fire is quenched, but the ship's mess chief, Marichek, suffers a coronary and dies.
Ramsey terminates the drill upon receiving this news.
Afterwards, Ramsey explains to Hunter that chaos is the perfect opportunity to test the crew's abilities, but Hunter fears crew morale will suffer due to constant testing and failure.
The next day, Hunter observes two crewmen fighting over a seemingly trivial matter, confirming his fear.
He tells Ramsey, but Ramsey is unconcerned, even going so far as to embarrass Hunter over the ship's 1MC and telling the crew to stay focused on the mission.

The Alabama eventually receives an Emergency Action Message, ordering the launch of ten of its missiles against the Russian nuclear installation, based on satellite information that the Russians' missiles are being fuelled.
Before the Alabama can launch its missiles, a second radio message begins to be received, but is cut off by the attack of a Russian Akula-class submarine loyal to Radchenko.

The radio electronics are damaged in the attack and cannot be used to decode the second message.
With the last confirmed order being to launch, Captain Ramsey decides to proceed.
Hunter refuses to concur - which is procedurally required to launch - because he believes the partial second message may be a retraction.
Hunter argues that the Alabama is not the only American submarine in the area, and if the order is not retracted, other submarines will launch their missiles as part of the fleet's standard redundancy doctrine.
Ramsey argues that the other American submarines may have been destroyed.

When Hunter refuses to consent to launch, Ramsey tries to relieve him of duty and to replace him with a different officer.
Instead, Hunter orders the arrest of Ramsey for attempting to circumvent protocol.
The crew's loyalty is divided between Hunter and Ramsey, but Hunter initially takes command.
The Alabama is attacked again by the Russian submarine.
The Alabama destroys it, but not before the Russian submarine fires two torpedoes.
One torpedo misses, but the other explodes near the Alabama, flooding the bilge bay and disabling the submarine's communications and main propulsion.

The crew tries desperately to restore what has been damaged.
Three crewmen are attempting to stop the bilge bay flooding, but Hunter reckons that, if the bay is not sealed, too much water will be taken on to enable the sub to rise once propulsion is restored.
Hunter orders the crewmen to exit and the bilge bay to be sealed.
Unfortunately, the men are unable to exit the bilge bay in time, and the compartment is sealed with them inside, forcing them to drown.
Shortly before the Alabama reaches crush depth, the propulsion systems come back on line, and Hunter orders the sub to proceed to near-surface level.
Once repairs are complete, this would allow the Alabama to re-establish communications and receive the cut-off message.

In the meantime, Lieutenant Dougherty, who is loyal to Ramsey, organizes a mutiny against Hunter with Lieutenants Zimmer and Westegard.
They try to recruit Lieutenant "Weps" Ince, but Ince is hesitant, having been friends with Hunter for a long time and feeling Hunter may be right.
Ramsey and the others draw small arms and recover the control room from Hunter.
Ramsey then proceeds with the missile launch order, and engages the missile lock key at the bridge.

Hunter escapes his arrest and gains the support of Ince in the missile control room, further delaying the launch.
Ramsey leaves the control room and tries to force Ince to open the safe containing the firing trigger.
Ince initially refuses, but relents after Ramsey threatens to shoot another crew member.
Meanwhile, Hunter and the crew members siding with him stage another retaking of the control room.
Hunter removes the missile key just as Ramsey pulls the trigger to fire a missile.
Ramsey returns to the control room and demands Hunter hand over the missile key, but Hunter is resolute.
With the radio team reporting their repairs are almost ready, the two men agree to a compromise; they will wait until the launch deadline to see if the radio can be repaired.
They talk about Lipizzaner horses being from Portugal or Spain - on this account they are both wrong as they were bred in what is now Slovenia.
After several tense minutes, communications are restored and they finally see the full message from the second transmission.
It is a retraction ordering that the missile launch be aborted, because Radchenko's rebellion has been quelled.
A chastened Ramsey leaves the conn.

After returning to base, Ramsey and Hunter are put before a naval tribunal to answer for their actions.
The tribunal concludes that both men were simultaneously right and wrong, so Hunter's actions were lawfully justified.
Unofficially, the tribunal chastises both men for failing to resolve the issues between them.
Thanks to Ramsey's personal recommendation, the tribunal agrees to grant Hunter command of his own boat, while allowing Ramsey to save face via an early retirement.
Both men then reconcile their differences and part ways.

