On February 1, misanthropic TV meteorologist Phil Connors, news producer Rita Hanson, and cameraman Larry, of the fictional Pittsburgh television station WPBH-TV 9 travel to Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, to cover the annual Groundhog Day festivities.
The following morning, Phil, who does not like the assignment or Punxsutawney, grudgingly gives his report on the festivities.
He then gets his team on the road back to Pittsburgh, but a blizzard shuts down all travel.
The team is forced to return to Punxsutawney and stay another night.

Phil wakes up to find that he is reliving February 2.
The day plays out exactly as it did before, with no one but Phil aware of the time loop.
At first he is confused, but, when the phenomenon continues on subsequent days, he decides to take advantage of the situation with no fear of long-term consequences: he learns secrets from the town's residents, seduces women, steals money, gets drunk, drives recklessly, and gets thrown in jail.
However, his attempts to get closer to Rita, to whom he has become attracted, repeatedly fail.

Eventually, Phil becomes depressed and tries more and more drastically to end the time loop; he gives ridiculous and offensive reports on the festival and eventually kidnaps Punxsutawney Phil and, after a police chase, drives off a high overlook into a quarry, killing both himself and the groundhog.
However, Phil wakes up and finds that nothing has changed; further attempts at suicide also fail to break the time loop, as he continues to find himself waking at six o'clock on the morning of February 2 with the clock radio on his nightstand playing "I Got You Babe" by Sonny & Cher.

When Phil explains the situation to Rita, she spends the day with him and into the early morning hours, but they fall asleep together and he awakens again, alone, still in the time loop.
Eventually, Phil endeavors to improve himself.
He begins to use his by-now vast knowledge of the day's events to help as many people around town as possible, and uses the time to learn, among other things, how to play the piano, to sculpt ice, and speak French.

Eventually, Phil is able to befriend almost everyone he meets during the day, using his experiences to save lives, to help townspeople, and ultimately to impress Rita, without having to resort to manipulation as on previous days.
He crafts a report on the Groundhog Day celebration so eloquent that all the other stations turn their microphones to him.
After the town's evening dance, Rita "buys" Phil at the event's bachelor auction.
Phil makes a snow sculpture of Rita's face and they kiss, then retire to his room.
He wakes the next morning and finds the time loop is broken; it is now February 3 and Rita is still with him.
They walk outside and Phil proposes that they move to Punxsutawney together.

