In a Louisiana nursing home in 1999, Paul Edgecomb becomes nervous while watching the 1935 film Top Hat.
His elderly friend Elaine becomes concerned, and Paul tells her that the film reminded him of his past, when he was a prison officer in charge of death row inmates at the Cold Mountain Penitentiary during the summer of 1935.
The scene shifts to 1935, where Paul works with fellow guards Brutus "Brutal" Howell, Harry Terwilliger, and Dean Stanton.
Unlike the other guards, Paul is a very calm guard and is sympathetic with some inmates.

One day, John Coffey, an African-American man convicted of raping and killing two young white girls, arrives in the prison, sentenced to death row.
However, much to the surprise of the other guards and inmates, he is very shy, soft-spoken, and a very emotional person.
John reveals extraordinary powers by healing Paul's bladder infection and resurrecting a mouse only by his touch.
Later, he heals the terminally ill wife of Warden Hal Moores.
When John is asked to explain his power, he merely says that he "took it back."

Meanwhile, Percy Wetmore, a sadist with a fierce temper, has recently begun working in the death row inmates block; his fellow guards dislike him, but are unable to get rid of him because of his family connections to the governor.
Meanwhile, a psychopathic prisoner named "Wild Bill" Wharton is booked into the jail for multiple murders committed during a robbery.
After Percy scares inmate Eduard "Del" Delacroix, Wharton seizes him onto the cell bars, which terrifies Percy, causing him to wet his pants out of shock.
Wharton eventually releases Percy when Paul threatens him with his gun.
Del is amused at Percy's pain.
He requests to manage the execution of Del, promising that afterward, he will transfer to an administrative post at a mental hospital.
An agreement is made, but then Percy uses the execution to punish Del.
He leaves the electric chair's conductive sponge dry, the sponge being a very important part of execution.
When the switch is thrown, the electricity flowing through the dry sponge causes it to burst into flames, burning Del to death in front of an audience.

At one point Wharton seizes John's arm, and John psychically senses that Wharton is also responsible for the crime for which John was wrongly convicted and sentenced to death.
John "takes back" the sickness in Hal's wife and regurgitates it into Percy, who then becomes unable to talk and shoots Wharton to death and falls into a state of permanent catatonia.
Percy is then admitted to Briar Ridge Mental Hospital as a patient rather than an administrator.
In the wake of these events, Paul interrogates John, who says he "punished them bad men" and offers to show Paul what he saw.
John takes Paul's hand and says he has to give Paul "a part of himself" in order for Paul to see what really happened to the girls.

It is revealed that Wharton had raped and killed the two young girls, and that John is innocent and was wrongfully convicted.
Paul asks John what he should do, if he should open the door and let John walk away.
John tells him that there is too much pain in the world, to which he is sensitive, and says he is "rightly tired of the pain" and is ready to rest.
For his last request on the night before his execution, John watches the film Top Hat.
When John is put in the electric chair, he, shedding tears, asks Paul not to put the traditional black hood over his head because he is afraid of the dark.
Paul agrees, shakes his hand as a goodbye, and John is executed.

As an elderly Paul finishes his story, he notes that he requested a transfer to a youth detention center, where he spent the remainder of his career.
Elaine questions his statement that he had a fully grown son at the time, and Paul explains that he was 44 years old at the time of John's execution, meaning that he is now over 108 years old.
This is apparently a side effect of John giving a "part of himself" to Paul.
Mr. Jingles, Del's mouse resurrected by John, is also still alive but Paul believes his outliving all of his relatives and friends to be a punishment from God for having let John be executed, and wonders how long it will be before his own death.
The film shows glimpses of the future in which Elaine died and Paul is still living in the retirement home.

