In 1985, awkward and shy 16-year-old high-schooler Ted Stroehmann lands a prom date with his dream girl Mary Jensen, only to have it cut short by a painful and embarrassing zipper accident.
After the ordeal garners the attention of numerous members of the household and community, Ted is finally carted off to a hospital, subsequently losing contact with Mary.

Thirteen years later, Ted is still in love maybe even obsessed with Mary.
On the advice of his best friend Dom, he hires a private detective named Pat Healy to track her down.
Healy finds that she is an orthopedic surgeon living in Miami with her friend, Magda, only to end up falling in love with the irresistible Mary as well.
He lies to Ted about Mary, saying she is grossly overweight with multiple children, to discourage him from making contact with her.
Healy resorts to lying, cheating, stalking, and even drugging Magda's dog to win Mary but is exposed by Mary's architect friend, Tucker, who is heavily reliant on crutches and speaks with an English accent.
Tucker, whose real name is revealed to be Norm, however, turns out to be a fraud himself, as he is an able-bodied, and entirely American citizen, pizza delivery boy who is also in love with Mary.
Using slander, Tucker AKA Norm drives away potential rivals, among them NFL quarterback Brett Favre, playing himself.

Ted, aided by Dom, drives down to Florida to reconnect with Mary.
Ted seems to have won Mary's love, until an anonymous letter exposes his being less than honest about his link to Healy.
While Ted confronts Healy and Tucker, Mary is confronted by Dom, who turns out to be her former boyfriend Woogie, who "got weird on her" back in high school, stealing all her shoes.
Having found out that Tucker also lied about Mary's former love interest, football player Brett Favre, Ted decides that Mary should be with Brett .
After reuniting Brett and Mary, Ted leaves tearfully.
But Mary chases after Ted, saying that she would be happiest with him.

The film concludes with the two engaging in a kiss while a guitarist, who periodically narrated the story in song throughout the film, is accidentally shot by Magda's boyfriend, who was trying to shoot Ted so he could win over Mary.

