William "Will" Thacker owns an independent travel bookshop in Notting Hill.
He is divorced and shares his house with an eccentric, uninhibited Welshman named Spike .

Will encounters Hollywood superstar Anna Scott when she enters his shop to buy a book.
Minutes later, they collide in the street and his orange juice spills on her clothes.
Will offers his house nearby for Anna to change.
Afterwards she surprises him with a kiss.

Days later, Spike remembers that "some American girl called Anna" had phoned and mentioned a "completely different name".
Anna is at the Ritz Hotel, under the name "Flintstone".
Will is allowed in, but her press interviews are running late and he is mistaken for a journalist.
He has to interview the cast of Anna's new film Helix, which he has not seen.
After the interviews, Anna calls him back in and says she has cancelled her evening appointment and can now go out with him.
Will is delighted, before remembering that his sister Honey is about to have a birthday party; Anna surprises him by saying she will go as his date.

There, at Max's and Bella's house, Anna feels at home with Will's friends as they share stories of who has the most unfortunate life.
Afterwards Will and Anna climb into a private garden square.
The next day they go to a cinema, then to a restaurant, where Will overhears Anna being mocked and defends her honour.
Anna invites Will to her room at the Ritz, but her American boyfriend, a famous film star named Jeff King, has arrived unexpectedly.
Will pretends to be a room-service waiter; Jeff casually condescends to him.
Anna is apologetic; she thought King had broken up with her.
Will realises he must end things with Anna, but is unable to forget her.

Six months later, Anna turns up at Will's house unannounced.
Old pin-ups of Anna taken many years earlier have been published and she needs to hide out.
After spending the day together, Anna goes downstairs to where Will is sleeping: they embrace, go up to the bedroom, and make love.
But in the morning they are stunned to see a horde of reporters at the door, alerted by Spike's careless talk at the pub.
Anna, angry at what she views as Will's betrayal, tells him the scandal will follow her forever and she already regrets what happened.
Stunned and hurt, Will lets her go without further argument.

Another six months later, Anna returns to London to make a Henry James film, which Will had earlier suggested.
Will is curious enough to visit the film set; Anna invites him to watch the day's filming, then talk.
A sound engineer provides headphones to hear the dialogue, but Will overhears Anna saying that he is "no one, just some guy from the past".
Crushed, Will leaves abruptly.
The next day, Anna comes to the bookshop with a parcel, and asks why he left.
When he explains, she says that her co-star is a notorious gossip and she was being discreet.
She wants to renew their relationship, saying that "the fame thing isn't really real" and that she is "just a girl, standing in front of a boy, asking him to love her".
Will hears her out, but says that if she later rejected him again he could not handle it, and turns her down.
She leaves Will's present behind, still wrapped; it turns out to be an original Marc Chagall painting, La Marie, that Will owns a print of.

Will meets his friends, who are supportiveuntil Spike arrives and promptly calls him a "daft prick", making Will realise he has made the biggest mistake of his life by turning Anna away.
Racing across London in Max's car, Will and his friends search for Anna, finally reaching Anna's press conference at the Savoy Hotel where Will, in his Horse & Hound persona, persuades her to stay in the UK with him.
Anna and Will later marry, the film concluding with a shot of Will and a pregnant Anna on a bench in a London square.

