In her senior year at the fictional CULA, girlish sorority president Elle Woods majors in fashion merchandising and is in love with her boyfriend, Warner Huntington III, who will attend Harvard Law School the following year.
She excitedly expects him to ask her to marry him, but he breaks up with her instead, saying that he has to be with someone more "serious" if he plans on a career in politics.

After a depressed Elle spends days holed up in her room, Elle's two best friends Margot and Serena take her to get her nails done.
While waiting, she finds an article about Warner's older brother and his new fiance, whom he met in law school.
Desperate to win Warner back, Elle takes the Law School Admission Test, applies to Harvard, and although the board of admissions is bewildered at her application and video essay, they are impressed, and she is accepted.
Upon Elle's arrival, she is ridiculed because of her beautiful, overly-girly looks and naive behavior, and she discovers that Warner is engaged to another student, Vivian Kensington.
She is humiliated even further when Professor Stromwell ejects Elle from her class for being unprepared .
The only friends Elle makes are Paulette, a kindly, yet shy divorced manicurist at a local salon, a fellow law student, David, and Emmett, a young attorney.
Elle later helps Paulette gain custody of her dog back from her ex-husband, and she also helps her seduce the delivery man on whom she has a crush, and pretends to be a scorned ex of David's to help him land a date.

After Vivian tricks Elle into attending a party in a Playboy Bunny costume where she retaliates by insulting her, Elle has a discussion with Warner and finally realizes he will never respect her.
Now determined to succeed on her own, Elle studies hard and impresses her professors and classmates in many occasions, proving herself enough for Vivian to consider her a threat, and wins an internship with Professor Callahan, as do Warner and Vivian.
They work with Callahan along with Emmett as an associate attorney, to defend Brooke Taylor-Windham, a famous fitness instructor accused of murdering her much older billionaire husband, Hayworth Windham.
Brooke was once Elle's fitness instructor and a member of her sorority.
Elle believes Brooke is innocent, but Brooke's stepdaughter, Chutney, and the household cabana boy say she is guilty, and that they saw Brooke standing over Windham's dead body, covered in his blood, while Brooke testifies that she loved her husband and only found him after he had been shot to death.

Brooke refuses to provide Callahan an alibi, but when Elle visits her in jail, Brooke admits that she had liposuction on the day of the murder.
Public knowledge of this fact would ruin Brooke's reputation as a fitness instructor, so Elle agrees to keep it secret and refuses to reveal the alibi to Callahan.
Impressed by her loyalty and integrity, Vivian starts to befriend Elle, also admitting that Warner was put on Harvard's wait-list and only got in because his father pulled some strings.
Elle also becomes disillusioned with Warner when he suggests she reveal Brooke's alibi and break her friend's trust just to further her career.

The case against Brooke begins to weaken when Elle deduces that the cabana boy is gay after he correctly identifies Elle's shoe style.
Callahan brushes off Elle's deduction as unfounded and ridiculous, but during the cross-examination, Emmett tricks him into identifying his boyfriend to the court, proving that his testimony about having an affair with Brooke was a lie.

Impressed by her performance, Callahan discusses Elle's future with her and then makes sexual advances on her, which Elle immediately rejects.
Overhearing part of the conversation, Vivian confronts Elle, thinking she was sleeping with Callahan to get ahead in her career.
Frustrated with the lack of respect she's getting, Elle decides to leave law school, but not before she tells Emmett about Callahan's advances.
While saying good-bye to Paulette at the nail salon, Professor Stromwell, who's there getting her hair done, intervenes reinvigorates Elle's desire to be successful in law school by implying that she actually greatly respects Elle and was once in her position.
Meanwhile, Emmett explains Elle's encounter with Callahan to Vivian and Brooke.
Brooke is enraged and Vivian is horrified at her mistake.
Before the trial continues, Brooke dismisses Callahan and hires Elle as her new attorney with Emmett supervising.

Elle begins shakily cross-examining Chutney, who testifies that she was home during her father's murder, but did not hear the gunshot because she was in the shower washing her hair after getting her hair permed earlier that day.
Elle's confidence suddenly spikes upon hearing this, and asks Chutney how long she'd been getting perms, to which Chutney reveals several years.
Elle then reveals that Chutney could not have been in the shower because washing permed hair within the first 24 hours would have deactivated the ammonium thioglycolate, and not only were Chutney's curls are still intact, but also someone who gets regular perms should be well aware of this fact.
Confronted, Chutney reveals in a frenzy that she accidentally killed Hayworth because she thought he was Brooke, whom she hated for marrying her father because she was Chutney's age.
Following the outburst, Brooke is exonerated, and Chutney is arrested.
After the trial, Warner tries to reconcile with Elle, but she rejects him, explaining that she needs a boyfriend who is less of a "bonehead" if she is to be successful in her new career.

Two years later, Elle, who has graduated with high honors, is the class-elected speaker at the ceremony, and has been invited into one of Boston's best law firms; Vivian is now Elle's best friend and has called off her engagement with Warner, who graduated without honors, no girlfriend, and no job offers; Paulette has married the delivery man and is expecting a baby girl to be named after Elle; and finally, Emmett has started his own practice, is now Elle's boyfriend, and will propose to her that night.

