The Hess family lives on an isolated farm in Doylestown, Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
Graham Hess is a former priest whose wife, Colleen, died in a horrific traffic accident caused by a town local, Ray Reddy .
No longer practicing religiously, Graham lives with his asthmatic son, Morgan, daughter Bo, who leaves water glasses all over the house claiming that the water tastes funny, and Graham's younger brother, Merrill, a former minor league baseball star who never made it to the major leagues because he swung too hard and struck out too often.
Graham discovers a huge crop circle in his field, reports of violent animal behavior have spread across town, and one of the Hess' dogs tries to attack Bo and Morgan.

Graham discovers that the farm is being watched at night, and he and Merrill chase a tall, dark figure from the roof of the barn and into the crops, where it quickly disappears.
Meanwhile, crop circles similar to the one in Graham's field appear around the world.
Morgan hears a strange noise on a baby monitor, but it stops before he can investigate further.
That evening, Graham goes to the crop circle, and hears the sound again.
After spotting a green leg sticking out of the cornrows, he flees to the house.
A news report reveals that strange lights in the sky have been spotted over Mexico City.

That night, Graham reveals to Merrill that he lost his faith after the death of his wife.
A flashback shows Graham approaching the scene of an accident.
He sees his wife pinned to a tree by a truck, and the officer tells him that his wife won't live.

The following morning, Graham visits Ray Reddy's house, whom he finds bleeding.
Ray apologizes for the accident, and tells Graham that he is fleeing to a nearby lake as he believes "they don't like water."
Graham sadly and kindly accepts his apology, and Ray leaves.
Meanwhile, Merril watches the news, and sees a video taken at a child's birthday party in Brazil.
The footage shows an alien crouching behind bushes, then slowly walking from out the bushes and across a small alley where it disappears.
Merril is shocked as the footage is shown.
Back at Ray's house Graham goes into the kitchen, where Ray has an alien locked in his pantry.
Graham uses the blade of a kitchen knife to try to see the alien's reflection under the door.
When the alien attempts to grab at him through the crack at the floor, Graham reacts by cutting off some of the alien's fingers, causing the creature to scream in pain.
Back at the Hess farm, Merril resorts to joining Morgan and Bo with their tin foil hats.
Graham returns home and the family decides between going to the lake or staying at the farm, opting to board up all the doors and windows and remain in the house.
While Graham and Merrill do this, Morgan and Bo watch a news report on the growing number of sightings around the world.
The baby monitor again starts emitting the alien noises, and the television loses its signal.
They finish boarding up the windows, and all move into the living room.
One of the dogs, called Isobel, left tied up outside, barks loudly and is silenced, and an alien is heard climbing up the house and onto the roof, where it breaks into the attic.
The family moves to the basement and props the door closed with a pick axe.
Graham and Merrill ward off an alien that attacks Morgan, who then has an asthma attack.
The news channel declares that the aliens have seemingly left earth.

The next morning, Graham decides to leave the basement and find Morgan's medicine.
The family follows, and to their horror, find an alien still inside the house.
It is revealed that it is the same alien from the pantry whose fingers Graham had cut off.
The unconscious Morgan is again attacked by the alien and taken hostage.
The alien acts as a predator and attempts to poison Morgan by releasing a toxin from its body, but because he is having an asthma attack, the poison doesn't get into his lungs.
Graham remembers his wife's dying words, which were "Tell Merrill to swing away".
He tells Merrill to "swing away" and Merrill attacks the alien with a baseball bat, and it releases Morgan.
They discover that water reacts like acid with the alien's skin, and Merrill smashes all the water glasses Bo had left all over the house.
Finally, Merrill hits the alien into furniture and water splashes on its face, killing it.
Graham administers Morgan's medication, and the boy recovers.

Some time later, the Hess family has recovered from the incident and they appear to be doing much better than before.
In the final scene, Graham is shown returning to his priestly duties, apparently having regained his faith.

