Gaylord "Greg" Focker is a nurse living in Chicago.
He intends to propose to his girlfriend Pam Byrnes, but his plan is disrupted when he learns that Pam's sister's fiance had asked Pam's father for permission before proposing.
Greg and Pam travel to Pam's parents' house to attend Pam's sister's wedding.
Greg hopes to propose to Pam in front of her family after receiving her father's permission, but this plan is put on hold when the airline loses his luggage, including the engagement ring.

At the Byrnes' home on Long Island, Greg meets Pam's father Jack, mother Dina and their beloved cat Mr. Jinx.
Jack immediately takes a dislike to Greg and openly criticizes him for his choice of career as a male nurse and whatever else he sees as a difference between Greg and the Byrnes family.
Greg tries to impress Jack, but his efforts fail completely.
Greg becomes even more uncomfortable after he receives an impromptu lie detector test from Jack and later learns from Pam that her father is a retired CIA counterintelligence officer.

Meeting the rest of Pam's family and friends, Greg still feels like an outsider.
Despite efforts to impress the family, Greg's inadvertent actions make him an easy target for ridicule and anger: he's asked to lead a prayeralthough he's Jewish, and starts reciting the lyrics from the song "Day by Day" from the musical "Godspell," he accidentally destroys an urn that contains the ashes of Jack's deceased mother, then he accidentally hits Pam's sister's eye during a pool volleyball mishap; uses a malfunctioning toilet that floods the Byrnes' back yard with sewage; sets the wedding altar on fire and inadvertently leads Jack to think he is a marijuana user.
Jack himself, conducts a background check on Greg's MCAT scores and thinks that Greg never actually took the MCAT's, and he inspects Greg's found luggage containing sexual toys and gimmicks.
Later, Greg loses Jinx and replaces him with a stray whose tail he spray paints to make him look like Mr. Jinx.
The stray cat trashes the house, and the Byrnes arrive at the scene.

The entire Byrnes family, including Pam agree that it is best for Greg to leave.
Desperate to save himself, Greg reveals that he's seen Jack talking to strange characters, and is planning a secret mission after Pam's sister's wedding, thus lying about being retired from the CIA.
Jack angrily explains that the secret mission was a surprise honeymoon for the newlywed couple, and Greg realizes that he's only dug himself deeper.
Greg reluctantly goes to the airport and is detained by airport security after he refuses to check in his luggage, remembering what happened last time.

Back at the Byrnes' household, Jack tries to convince his wife and Pam that Greg would be an unsuitable husband, as he is completely dishonest and stupid.
Upon receiving retribution from both his wife and Pam, Jack realizes that Pam truly loves Greg.
Jack rushes to the airport, convinces airport security to release Greg, and demands that he be honest about everything that transpired.
Greg admits that he loves Pam, and everything he did before was out of desperation to win Jack's approval.
Jack admits that maybe he had been too hard on Greg, and he brings him back to the Byrnes' household.

Greg proposes to Pam.
She accepts, and her parents agree that they should now meet Greg's parents.
After Debbie's wedding, Jack views footage of Greg recorded by hidden cameras that he had placed strategically around their house.

