In Cambridge, three animal liberation activists break into a medical research laboratory with the intent of freeing captive chimpanzees.
They are interrupted by a scientist, who desperately warns them that the chimps are infected with a highly contagious rage-inducing virus that is spread through blood and saliva.
Ignoring the scientist's pleas, the activists release a chimpanzee, who attacks one of them and immediately infects her leading her to attack and infect everyone else present.

28 days later, in London, Jim, a bicycle courier, awakens from a coma in St Thomas' Hospital.
He finds the entire hospital deserted and wanders on the streets of London, finding it deserted as well, with signs of catastrophe everywhere.
Desperate, he wanders into a church, where he finds a priest.
Jim tries to approach him, only to be attacked by the priest who turns out to be infected.
He is soon attacked by more infected as well, but is rescued by Selena and Mark .

Selena and Mark take Jim to their hideout, a small store in London Underground, where they explain that while Jim was in a coma, a virus spread among the populace, resulting in societal collapse.
They also claim the virus has been reported in Paris and New York City as well, suggesting the infection has spread worldwide.

The next morning, Selena and Mark accompany Jim to Jim's parents' house in Deptford, where he discovers they have committed suicide.
That night, the three are attacked by more infected.
Mark is bitten, prompting Selena to kill him; she later explains that the virus overwhelms its victims in 10 to 20 seconds, and should Jim become infected she will kill him "in a heartbeat".
They leave and eventually spot some blinking Christmas lights from Balfron Tower, discovering two more survivors cab driver Frank and his teenage daughter Hannah who allow them to take shelter.
Frank informs them the next day that their supplies particularly water are dwindling and plays them a pre-recorded radio broadcast from a military blockade near Manchester, which claims they have "the answer to infection" and promises to protect any survivors who reach them.

The group board Frank's cab in search of the signal' source, and throughout the trip they bond with one another through various situations.
When the four reach the deserted blockade, Frank is infected when a drop of blood from a dead body falls into his eye.
As he succumbs he is killed by arriving soldiers, who take the remaining survivors to a fortified mansion under the command of Major Henry West .
During the group's stay, West reveals that his "answer to infection" entails waiting for the infected to starve to death and luring female survivors into sexual slavery, so that West's platoon can repopulate the country.
The group attempts to flee, but Jim is captured by the soldiers, along with the dissenting Sergeant Farrell .
While imprisoned, Farrell speculates that the virus has not spread beyond Great Britain and that the country is being quarantined.

The next day, the girls are being prepared for gang-rape as two soldiers lead Jim and Farrell to execution.
When his escorts quarrel after killing Farrell, Jim escapes and spots a NATO aircraft flying overhead, proving Farrell's theory is correct.
Jim lures West and another soldier to the blockade, where Jim kills the latter and leaves West stranded for arriving infected.
He then runs back to the mansion and releases Mailer, an infected soldier West kept for observation, who attacks the rest of the platoon.
Amidst the mayhem, Jim reunites with Selena and Hannah, and they run to Frank's cab, where West is waiting and shoots Jim in the stomach.
Hannah reverses the cab towards Mailer, who grabs West through the rear window and kills him.
The trio finally leaves the mansion.

Another 28 days later, Jim is recovering at a remote cottage.
Downstairs, he finds Selena sewing large swaths of fabric when Hannah appears.
The three rush outside and unfurl a huge cloth banner, adding the final letter to the word "HELLO" laid out on the meadow.
A lone Finnish jet flies over the landscape, and the infected are shown dying of starvation.
The film ends with the jet flying over the three survivors and the pilot calling in a rescue helicopter.

