In Fall 1995 in Detroit, Jimmy "B-Rabbit" Smith Jr., a young and unhappy blue-collar worker from a poor family, struggles with various aspects of his life.
He has moved back north of 8 Mile Road to the rundown trailer home in Warren, Michigan of his alcoholic mother Stephanie, his little sister Lily, and Stephanie's abusive live-in boyfriend Greg .
Although encouraged by his friends, who hail him as a talented rap music artist, Jimmy worries about his potential as a musician, particularly due to his lack of confidence.
This caused him to panic during a rap battle one night at a club called The Shelter, and leave the stage humiliated.

Jimmy works at an automotive factory, but when he asks for extra shifts, his supervisor dismisses his request on account of his habitual tardiness.
A woman named Alex shows up at the factory one day looking for her brother and meets Jimmy; they become friends.
Jimmy comes to realize that his life has remained largely the same since high school.
At first, he considers himself a victim of his circumstances and blames others for his problems.
Over time, he begins to take more responsibility for the direction of his life.
When he exhibits an improved attitude and performance at work, his supervisor grants him the extra shifts he requested.

Jimmy's friendship with Wink, a radio station employee with ties to a record label prompter, becomes strained after he finds out Wink does promotional work for Jimmy's rivals, a gang of rappers known as the 'Leaders of the Free World'.
At one point, Jimmy and his friends get into a brawl with the Leaders, which is broken only when Jimmy's friend Cheddar Bob pulls out a gun and accidentally shoots himself in the testicles.
He is hospitalized and relegated to crutches.

At work one day, Jimmy sees a rap battle in which a worker named Mike insults a fellow co-worker, Paul, who is gay, with his lyrics.
Jimmy joins the battle to defend Paul by insulting Mike.
Alex witnesses this and is impressed.
He asks her out on a date for that night, but they end up having sex in the factory.
Wink arranges for Jimmy to meet with producers at a recording studio, but when Jimmy goes there, he finds Wink and Alex having sex on top of a mixing console.
He beats up Wink and their friendship is ended.
Wink and the Leaders of the Free World, in retaliation, attack Jimmy outside his mother's trailer and beat him badly.
The leader of the gang, Papa Doc, puts a gun to Jimmy's face, threatening to kill him but Wink dissuades Papa Doc.

Jimmy's best friend Future pushes him to get his revenge by competing against the Leaders of the Free World at the next rap battle.
However, Jimmy's late-night shift conflicts with the next battle tournament.
But a goodbye visit from Alex, who is moving to New York, changes his mind about competing.
Paul, the co-worker whom Jimmy had stood up for, agrees to cover for him at work, and Jimmy enters the battle.

In each of the three rounds of the battle, Jimmy is pitted against a different member of the Leaders.
He wins both of the first two rounds, and in the last round, he is paired against Papa Doc.
Jimmy is aware that Doc knows all his weak points, so he decides to address them preemptively with his lyrics.
He acknowledges without shame his lower-class roots and the various humiliations the Leaders have inflicted on him.
He goes on to use his difficult life as a springboard to reveal the truth about Papa Doc: his real name is Clarence and, despite passing himself off as a thug, he comes from a privileged background, having attended Cranbrook Schools, a private high school in upper-class suburb Bloomfield Hills, and grown up in a stable two-parent household.

With nothing to say in rebuttal, Clarence hands the microphone back to Future, feeling embarrassed that someone Papa Doc thought was below him beat him in a battle.
After being congratulated by Alex and his friends, Future offers him a position hosting battles at The Shelter.
Jimmy declines, saying he has to get back to work and to find success his own way.
He walks back to work, with a renewed sense of confidence about his future.

