A man revealed to be Jacques Saunire is being pursued by a mysterious hooded character known as Silas through the Grand Gallery in the Louvre in Paris.
Silas demands the location of the Priory's clef de vote or "keystone."
Under threat of death, Saunire finally confesses the keystone is kept in the sacristy of Church of Saint-Sulpice, "beneath the Rose."
Silas thanks him, and then shoots him in the stomach.
Meanwhile, American symbologist Robert Langdon, who is in Paris as a guest lecturer on symbols and the sacred feminine, is contacted by the French police, and summoned to the Louvre to view the crime scene.
He discovers the dying Saunire has created an intricate display using black light ink and his own body and blood.
Captain Bezu Fache asks him for his interpretation of the puzzling scene.

Silas calls a mysterious man known as "The Teacher", revealing that he has killed all four protectors of the keystone and that all confirmed the same location.
He dons a metal cilice on his thigh and proceeds to flagellate himself with a whip for the sins of murder.
Facilitated by Bishop Manuel Aringarosa, Silas then travels to Saint-Sulpice and is admitted by an elderly nun; left alone, he excavates beneath the floor of the church to find a stone saying only JOB 38:11.
He confronts the nun, who quotes the passage: "Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further."
Realizing that he has been deceived, Silas is enraged and kills the nun.

Sophie Neveu, a cryptologist with the French police, enters the Louvre as well and slips Langdon a message which leads him to the bathroom.
There, Sophie meets him and tells him that he is being tracked, a GPS tracking dot has been slipped into his jacket and that he is a primary suspect in the murder case because of a line of text found by the corpse .
Sophie however, believes that Saunire, who is revealed to be her grandfather, wanted to pass a hidden message on to her, and that he had wanted to bring Langdon into the equation so that he could help her crack the code.

Buying some time by throwing the tracking device into the back of a truck, the pair begin exploring the Louvre, finding more anagram messages that Saunire had left behind.
Many of these relate to Leonardo da Vinci's art, and the pair find a key with a Fleur-de-lis behind Madonna of the Rocks painting.
Langdon deduces from this that Saunire was a member of the Priory of Sion, a secret society associated with the Knights Templar.

Pursued by the French police and cut off from the United States Embassy, the pair escape to the Bois de Boulogne where Langdon closely inspects the key.
He notices an inscription on the side - an address.
The address directs them to the Depository Bank of Zurich where the key is used for a safety deposit box.
In the bank, they find Saunire's deposit box and open it using the 10 digit Fibonacci numbers in order .
Inside the box, they find a rosewood container, which contains a cryptex: a cylindrical container with five alphabetical dials which must be arranged in the correct sequence to spell out a 5-letter code word, in order to open and access the papyrus message inside.
Using force to open the cryptex would break a vial of vinegar inside, which would dissolve the papyrus and destroy the message.

Unfortunately, the police are called by a security guard and they are forced to leave.
The bank manager, Andre Vernet, assists them in escaping by taking them as passengers in an armoured van to escape the routine checks of the police.
In the back of the truck Langdon and Neveu have a lengthy discussion about the cryptex and Neveu says that her grandfather often played games with her involving cryptexes.
Langdon says that the cryptex might hold valuable information or another clue about what they are trying to discover.
Eventually, they come to a sudden stop and Vernet forces them at gunpoint to give him the cryptex.
Langdon tricks Vernet and disarms him and he and Sophie escape with the cryptex in their hands.

Langdon suggests that they visit his friend, Sir Leigh Teabing, for assistance to opening the cryptex.
Leigh Teabing turns out to be an enthusiastic seeker of the Holy Grail, which he believes is not actually a cup but instead Mary Magdalene.
Mary was pregnant at the time of Christ's crucifixion, and Teabing tells Sophie that the Priory of Sion was formed to protect the descendants of Jesus.
Jacques Saunire was believed to be a part of this society and Teabing suspects that he was training Sophie to join it also.
Silas, meanwhile, breaks into Teabing's mansion and attempts to steal the cryptex.
Teabing uses his cane to knock Silas out and they escape again, taking the butler, Remy Jean, and Silas with them.
The group escapes in Teabing's plane, following the next clue to London.
Fache learns of their destination, and alerts the London Metropolitan Police to apprehend them at the airport.
But Teabing manages to slip the party past the police with a trick of misdirection.

Teabing leads Langdon and Neveu to the Temple Church in London, which is shown to be a red herring.
Silas is freed by Remy Jean, who is revealed to be a follower of The Teacher as well.
The two take Teabing hostage, and Silas, believing Remy to be The Teacher, holes up in an Opus Dei safehouse.
Remy is killed by the mysterious man after deceiving Silas.
Silas is attacked by the police and, in the ensuing gunfire, accidentally shoots Bishop Manuel Aringarosa.
In his grief, Silas dies in police-assisted suicide and Aringarosa is taken to the hospital, as well as being arrested by Fache for using him to chase Langdon.

Langdon is betrayed by Teabing, who is revealed to be the true Teacher.
He escapes with the Cryptex, and attempts to find the next clue at Isaac Newton's tomb in Westminster Abbey, as Newton was another member of the Priory.
Langdon and Neveu catch up with him, and chase him into the nearby chapter house.
Teabing explained that he wanted to find Mary Magdalene's remains to prove he was correct about the Holy Grail and threatens to shoot Sophie if Langdon does not open the cryptex.
Langdon responds by throwing the cryptex into the air.
Teabing catches, but fumbles it, and it hits the ground, shattering the internal vial of vinegar.
Teabing becomes distraught, as he believes the vinegar has destroyed the papyrus within the still intact cryptex.

After Teabing is arrested, it is revealed that Langdon had cracked the code and removed the clue from the cryptex before throwing it.
Using the clue, they travel to Rosslyn Chapel in Scotland where Magdalene's remains had previously been hidden.
The remains had since been moved, but they meet other members of the secret organization that protected her.
It is revealed that Sophie is actually Magdalene's descendant and therefore is the current living descendant of Jesus Christ.
They vow to keep her safe.
Langdon and Sophie part ways shortly after.

Back in Paris, Langdon accidentally cuts himself while shaving and the line of blood on the sink reminds him of the Rose Line, which sparks an epiphany.
He goes out into the streets of Paris and follows the Rose Line and finds the location of the Holy Grail, buried under the pyramid in the Louvre.
Langdon then kneels above Mary Magdalene's tomb as the Knights Templar did before him.

