The film tells the story of Chiyo Sakamoto, a poor Japanese girl who has been sold along with her older sister Satsu into a life of servitude by her parents.
Chiyo is taken in by the proprietress of a geisha house, Mother, but Satsu is rejected and is sold to another house in the "pleasure district" of the Hanamachi.
At the okiya, she meets another young girl named Pumpkin, and also has numerous unpleasant run-ins with the okiya's senior geisha Hatsumomo.

Chiyo conspires with Satsu to run from their new lives.
She returns to the okiya and discovers Hatsumomo in the shed having sex with her boyfriend, Koichi.
Koichi runs away and Hatsumomo accuses Chiyo for stealing, but Chiyo then informs Mother of what she saw in the shed and Hatsumomo is banned from seeing Koichi.
On the night of their planned escape, Chiyo falls off the rooftop and is injured.
Mother finds out about Chiyo's attempt, therefore she stops paying for Chiyo's geisha training, and informs her that her parents are dead.
Chiyo never sees Satsu again, and is demoted to working as a slave to pay off her debts to Mother.

One day, the young Chiyo is noticed by the Chairman and his geisha companions.
He buys her an iced sorbet and gives her his handkerchief with some money in it.
Inspired by his act of kindness, Chiyo resolves to become a geisha so that she may one day become a part of the Chairman's life.

Several years later, Chiyo is taken under the wing of Mameha, one of Kyoto's most successful geisha.
Under Mameha's tutelage, Chiyo becomes a maiko and then takes the name of Sayuri.
Hatsumomo becomes Sayuri's rival and seeks to destroy her while Sayuri intends to reunite with the Chairman and longs to catch his attention.
She continues to grow in popularity, making Hatsumomo spread lies and rumors to ruin Sayuri's reputation.
Meanwhile, Mameha starts a bidding war for Sayuri's mizuage, which will make her a full geisha.
Sayuri gets named the lead dancer for a popular performance, where she catches the attention of bidders, including the Baron .
The Baron invites Sayuri to his house for a sakura-viewing party.
Mameha shows resistance to let Sayuri attend but lets her go.
When the Baron shows a kimono to Sayuri in private at the party, he undresses her in order to "take a look".
Sayuri returns to Kyoto where Mameha learns of the assault and fears that Sayuri lost her virginity, despite Sayuri saying she isn't worthless.

That evening, Sayuri wins the bidding with fifteen thousand yen.
Mother, seeing Sayuri as a financial opportunity, names her as her adopted daughter and heiress to the okiya.
This crushes Pumpkin, who was hoping that she would get adopted, and Hatsumomo is enraged when Mother informs that Hatsumomo is more like a prostitute.
Mameha later tells Sayuri that the bid was down to two people, Dr. Crab and the Baron.
Mameha let it go to Dr. Crab because of her romantic feelings for the Baron, despite his bid being even higher.
When returning home from the mizuage ceremony, Sayuri finds Hatsumomo in her room, where she has found the Chairman's handkerchief and they fight.
During the fight, a gas lighter ignites a fire and the okiya is partially destroyed.
Hatsumomo is then kicked out of the okiya, leaving for good with her fate unknown.

Sayuri's prosperous life is cut short by the outbreak of World War II.
Sayuri and Mameha are separated, with Sayuri going to the hills to work for a kimono maker.
After the war, Sayuri is reunited with Mameha along with the help of Nobu, the Chairman's friend, and they become geisha once more to impress an American Colonel that is going into business with Nobu and the Chairman.
Sayuri meets back up with Pumpkin, who is now a flirty escort.
Sayuri goes on a trip with Nobu, the Chairman, Mameha, Pumpkin and the Americans to the Amami Islands.

At Amami, the Colonel propositions Sayuri, but is rejected.
Nobu witnesses the incident and confronts Sayuri.
He finally confesses his feelings that he wants to become her danna.
Sayuri is distraught and devises a plan to humiliate herself with the Colonel in front of Nobu.
But because of her secret resentment of Sayuri, Pumpkin brings the Chairman instead, knowing that it would devastate Sayuri.

A few days later, after returning to Gion, Sayuri receives a call to go to the teahouse.
While waiting, Sayuri expects Nobu to arrive, but instead the Chairman comes where he finally reveals to her that he knows she is Chiyo.
He tells her that Nobu had learned about the affair and ceased his desire to be her danna.
He also reveals that he was responsible for sending Mameha to her so that she could fulfill her dreams of becoming a geisha.
Sayuri finally reveals her love to the Chairman, which she has been harbouring for over twenty years.
The film ends with their loving embrace and kiss and a stroll through a beautiful Japanese garden.

