In the 26th century, humanity has left an overpopulated Earth and moved to a new star system, colonizing many planets and moons.
The central planets formed the Alliance and won a war against the outer planet Independentsthose refusing to join the Alliance.
River Tam is among the young people being coercively conditioned by Alliance scientists to be psychic assassins.
She is rescued by her brother Simon.
Because top government secrets have been inadvertently exposed to River's abilities, an Alliance agent known only as the Operative is tasked with recapturing her.

The siblings have found refuge aboard the transport spaceship Serenity, captained by smuggler and Independent war veteran Malcolm "Mal" Reynolds.
Despite Simon's objections, Mal brings River on a bank robbery where they are attacked by the savage and cannibalistic Reavers.
They escape, but Simon decides he and River will leave Serenity at the next port.
Once there, however, a television commercial causes River to go berserk and attack numerous patrons of a bar, and Mal takes the siblings back aboard the ship.
The crew contacts reclusive hacker Mr. Universe, who discovers within the commercial a subliminal message designed to trigger River's mental conditioning.
He notes River whispered "Miranda" before attacking and warns that there is evidence someone has seen the footage.

Mal receives a call from Inara Serra, a former passenger.
He fears she is in danger; despite knowing it is a trap, Mal goes to rescue her.
The Operative confronts Mal, promising to let him go free if he turns over River, but Mal refuses and escapes with Inara.
River reveals that Miranda is a planet located beyond a region of space swarming with Reavers.
The crew flies to the planet Haven to ponder their next move.
However, the Alliance has attacked it, killing their friend Shepherd Book.
The Operative is killing anyone who offered the crew safe haven, and he promises to pursue them until he captures River.

Serenity travels through the fleet of Reaver vessels to Miranda to learn what the Alliance is hiding.
On Miranda, the crew find the colonists dead.
A distress beacon leads them to a recording by the last surviving member of an Alliance survey team, which explains that an experimental chemical designed to suppress aggression was added into Miranda's air.
Most residents became so docile they allowed themselves to die.
A small portion of the population had the opposite reaction and became exceedingly aggressive and violent, turning into Reavers.

Mal asks Mr. Universe to broadcast the recording to everyone in the system, but the Operative bribes Mr. Universe to betray them.
Once Mr. Universe completes his role, the Operative mortally wounds him and destroys most of his transmitting equipment.
Mal suspects a trap, and lures the Reaver fleet into pursuing Serenity to Mr. Universe's planet and attacking the waiting Alliance fleet.
The damaged Serenity crash lands, and pilot Hoban Washburne is killed when Reavers attack.
The crew flees, planning to make a last stand against the Reavers to buy Mal time to broadcast the recording.
Through a message recorded by Mr. Universe before his death, Mal learns of a backup transmitter.
Sustaining heavy injuries, the crew retreats behind a set of blast doors that fail to properly close.
A Reaver shoots through the opening and severely wounds Simon, prompting River to charge through the doors and close them as the Reavers drag her away.

At the backup transmitter, Mal cripples the Operative and forces him to watch the recording as it is broadcast.
Mal returns to the crew, and the blast doors open to reveal that River killed the Reavers.
Alliance troops reach the group, but the Operative orders them to stand down.

The Operative provides medical aid and resources to repair Serenity.
The crew erects memorials for their fallen friends.
Simon consummates his romantic relationship with mechanic Kaylee Frye.
The Operative tells Mal the broadcast has weakened the Alliance government.
While he will try to convince them that River and Simon are no longer threats, he cannot guarantee the Alliance will end their pursuit.
Inara decides that she will remain with the crew, and Serenity takes off with River as Mal's co-pilot.

