Willie T. Stokes and his dwarfed assistant Marcus are professional thieves.
Every year, Willie disguises himself as a department store Santa Claus and Marcus disguises himself as an elf in order for both of them to rob shopping malls blind at night.
Willie is an alcoholic, a sex addict, and is gradually unable to perform his Santa duties appropriately with children, much to Marcus' dismay.
When they are hired at the fictional Saguaro Square Mall in Phoenix, the vulgar remarks made by Willie shock the prudish mall manager Bob Chipeska, who brings it to the attention of security chief Gin Slagel .

At the mall, Willie is visited by Thurman Merman, an exceedingly naive and gullible, overweight boy who thinks Willie is really Santa.
The boy is a target of taunt and torment from a skateboarding gang.
At a bar, Willie meets Sue, a woman with a Santa Claus fetish, and they begin a sexual relationship.
Willie is harassed by a man in the bar, but Thurman intervenes.
Willie gives Thurman a ride home, then enters the boy's house where he lives with his senile grandmother .
Thurman reveals that his mother died, and his father is away "exploring mountains" .
Willie tricks Thurman into letting him steal from the house safe and steals a BMW owned by Thurman's father.

Bob informs Gin that he overheard Willie having sex with a woman in a mall dressing room; Gin starts to investigate.
Willie goes to his motel room and sees it being raided, causing him to take advantage of Thurman's naivete and live in his house.
Marcus berates Willie for taking advantage of Thurman, stating his disapproval of Willie's sex addiction.

Gin's investigation of Willie includes visiting Thurman's imprisoned father, revealing that Willie is staying with Thurman illegally.
He confronts Willie at the mall, and takes him and Marcus to a bar.
There, he reveals that he has figured out their plan, blackmailing them for half of the cut to keep silent.

Willie attempts to commit suicide by inhaling vehicle exhaust fumes.
He gives Thurman a letter to give to the police, confessing all his misdeeds.
Willie notices Thurman's black eye, which persuades him to make an example of the skateboarding bully.
A renewed sense of purpose for Willie has him attempt to train Thurman in boxing.

Marcus and his wife Lois set up a trap for Gin, feigning needing a jump start for their vehicle from Gin's.
Lois hits Gin with the car, then Marcus kills him.

On Christmas Eve, when the heist is almost complete, Willie goes to get Thurman a pink stuffed elephant that he had wanted for Christmas.
Just as he gets the elephant, Marcus reveals to Willie that he intends to kill him, fed up with his increasing carelessness.
Lois tells him to hurry up and kill Willie so they can get away with the merchandise.
The police swarm them, tipped off by the letter Willie gave to Thurman.
When Marcus opens fire, the police shoot at him and Willie flees.
Determined to give Thurman his present, he leads the police on a chase to Thurman's house, ignoring orders to freeze.
He is repeatedly shot on Thurman's porch, but survives.

The epilogue is told through a letter from Willie, who is in a hospital recovering.
He expresses his gratitude for Thurman in giving the letter to the police and clearing his name.
Shooting an unarmed Santa embarrassed the police, and Sue is granted guardianship over Thurman and his house until Thurman's father, Mr. Merman, is released.
Willie also explains that Marcus and Lois are serving time behind bars for their actions, while expressing hope Mr. Merman is wise to avoid the two.
The movie ends with Thurman finally standing up to his bully by kicking him in the crotch causing him to fall to the ground.
Thurman is seen riding his bike away flipping off the bully.

