In 1983, 12-year-old Shaun gets into a fight at school after a classmate makes an offensive joke about his father, who died in the Falklands War.
On his way home, Shaun comes across a gang of young skinheads led by Woody, who feels sympathy for Shaun and invites him to join the group.
They accept Shaun as a member, and he finds a big brother in Woody, while developing a romance with Smell, an older girl who dresses in a new wave style.

Combo, an older skinhead, returns to the group after a prison sentence, accompanied by a knife-wielding moustachioed man called Banjo.
A charismatic but unstable individual with sociopathic tendencies, Combo expresses English nationalist and racist views, and attempts to enforce his leadership over the other skinheads.
This leads the group to split, with young Shaun, the belligerent Pukey, and Gadget, who feels bullied by Woody for his weight, choosing Combo over Woody's apolitical gang.

Shaun finds a mentor figure in Combo, who in turn is impressed by and identifies with Shaun.
Shaun goes with Combo's group to a white nationalist meeting.
After Pukey expresses doubt over their racist and nationalistic politics, Combo throws him out of the group and sends him back to Woody.
The gang then engages in racist antagonism of, among others, shopkeeper Mr. Sandhu, an Indian man who had previously banned Shaun from his shop.

Combo becomes depressed after Lol, Woody's girlfriend, rejects him when he admits that he has loved her since they had sex years before.
To console himself, Combo buys cannabis from Milky, the only black skinhead in Woody's gang.
During a party, Combo and Milky bond while intoxicated, but Combo becomes increasingly jealous when Milky shares details of his many relatives and comfortable family life.
Enraged, Combo beats Milky into a coma while Banjo holds down Shaun, who watches in horror.
When Banjo desires to hit Milky as well, Combo violently beats him and evicts him from the apartment.
Horrified at what he has done, Combo weeps over Milky's body.
Shaun and Combo later take Milky to a nearby hospital.

The film cuts forward to Shaun in his room brooding about what has happened, with his mother Cynthia assuring Shaun that Milky will be all right.
Shaun is then shown walking near the beach and throwing his Saint George Flag, a gift from Combo, into the sea.

