In 2009, American geologist Adrian Helmsley visits astrophysicist Satnam Tsurutani in India and learns that neutrinos from a massive solar flare are causing the temperature of the Earth's core to rapidly increase.
Arriving at a party in Washington, D.C, Helmsley presents his information to White House Chief of Staff Carl Anheuser, who takes him to meet the President.

In 2010, U.S. President Thomas Wilson and other international leaders begin a secret project to ensure humanity's survival.
The G8 nations, plus China, are building nine enormous arks, capable of carrying 100,000 people each, near Cho Ming, Tibet, in the Himalayas.
A Buddhist monk named Nima is evacuated while his brother Tenzin joins the Ark project.
Critical funding is raised by selling tickets for 1 billion per person for a handful of seats.
By 2011, valuable items are moved to the arks with the help of art expert and First Daughter Dr. Laura Wilson.

In 2012, science fiction writer Jackson Curtis is a chauffeur in Los Angeles for Russian billionaire Yuri Karpov.
Jackson's former wife Kate, and their children Noah and Lilly, live with Kate's boyfriend, plastic surgeon Gordon Silberman.
Jackson takes Noah and Lilly camping in Yellowstone National Park.
When they find an area fenced off by the U.S. Army, Jackson takes his kids over the fence; they are caught and taken to see Helmsley.
After being released from military custody, they meet Charlie Frost, who hosts a radio show from the park.

That night, after the military evacuates from Yellowstone, Jackson watches Charlie's video of Charles Hapgood's theory that polar shifts and the Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar have predicted that the 2012 phenomenon will occur.
Charlie also tells Jackson that those who discovered this and plotted to inform the public were killed.
Megathrust earthquakes begin affecting California.
Jackson returns home to rescue his family just as a 10.9 magnitude earthquake hits California.
They escape from Los Angeles in a private plane as the Earth crust displacement begins and a major portion of California collapses and sinks into the Pacific Ocean.

The group flies to Yellowstone to retrieve a map from Charlie displaying the location of the arks.
They escape as the Yellowstone Caldera erupts; Charlie stays behind to broadcast the eruption and is killed.
Pyroclastic Flows destroy Yellowstone and Jackson is nearly killed.The group later, lands in Las Vegas to find a larger plane.
They also find Yuri, his twin sons, Alec and Oleg, girlfriend Tamara and pilot Sasha.
Sasha and Gordon fly them out in an available Antonov An-500 aircraft as the Yellowstone ash cloud destroys the city.

Helmsley, Anheuser and Laura Wilson are flying on Air Force One to the arks.
President Wilson remains in Washington, D.C. to address the nation one last time.
With the entire presidential line of succession gone, Anheuser takes leadership.
Megatsunamis destroy coastal areas, including Washington, D.C, killing everyone in its vicinity.

When the group arrive in China, the plane runs out of fuel and everyone leaves through a car.
Sasha is killed as the plane falls down a mountain and the plane explodes.
They are spotted by helicopters from the Chinese army.
Yuri and his sons, possessing tickets, are taken to the arks, leaving the Curtis family and Gordon behind.
The remaining group are picked up by Nima and taken to the arks with his grandparents.
They stow away on Ark 4, where the United States contingent is aboard, with the help of Tenzin.
As a 1500 meter tall megatsunami topples over the Himalayas and approaches the site, an impact driver becomes lodged in the gears of the ark's hydraulic doors, preventing a boarding gate from closing, which in turn prevents the ship from starting its engines.
In the ensuing chaos, Yuri and Gordon are killed, and Ark 4 floods and fills up with water, it is set adrift.
Jackson and Noah dislodge the impact driver and the crew regains control of the ark before it collides with Mount Everest.
Jackson reunites with his family, and he and Kate reconcile.

27 days later, as waters recede, the three arks approach the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa, where the Drakensberg mountain range has emerged.
Helmsley starts a relationship with Laura while Jackson and Kate rekindle their relationship.

*Alternate ending*

An alternate ending is featured on the DVD release of the film.
After Captain Michaels, the captain of Ark 4, announces that they are heading to the Cape of Good Hope, he tells Dr. Helmsley that he has a phone call waiting for him.
Dr. Helmsley discovers that his father Harry is still alive.
Harry tells his son that he, Tony, and some of the passengers and crew survived the megatsunami that struck the Genesis.
Captain Michaels states that they should have a visual on the ocean-liner shortly.
After Kate thanks Laura for taking care of Lily, Laura tells Jackson that she liked his book.
Jackson then gives Noah his cell phone back which he recovered during Ark 4's flooding.
Lily then announces that she sees an island.
The Arks arrive at the shipwrecked Genesis and the survivors on the beach.

