Ann Dane, startled by the sound of a door window breaking, wakes her husband, Richard; he accidentally shoots the intruder, Freddy Russell, a wanted felon.
Richard is shaken by the experience but attempts to move on with his life.
Richard visits the cemetery on the day of Freddy's burial where Freddy's father, Bena paroled convictaccosts Richard in his car, making a veiled reference to Richard's son, Jordan.
Alarmed, Richard picks up Jordan from school and arranges for Ann to meet them at the police station.
Ben follows him but the police decline Richard's request for help until the Danes' house is broken into again.

With the house now under police protection, the intruderwho has been hiding in the house crawlspace since the initial break-inknocks out the guard and hides in Jordan's room, locking the door.
He escapes to a nearby river and is tracked to Mexico, where he is finally apprehended.
The police invite Richard to the station to close the case and Richard notices a wanted poster for "Frederick Russell", who looks different from the man that he shot.
Richard attempts to point out the contradiction officer Ray Price, but Ray dismisses this as a trick of memory due to shock and refuses to discuss the possibility, repeatedly.

Richard sees Ben taken away in an unmarked police car, which he follows.
He sees the police forcibly remove Ben from the car ; they inject him with an unknown substance, leave him on train tracks and splash him with alcohol.
Richard sees a train approaching and saves Ben who does not believe Richard's claims that the man he shot was not Freddy.
They exhume Freddy's grave and Ben confirms that the man inside is not his son.
Ben notes that the top-half of the man's fingers have been cut off to prevent identification.

Ray Price visits Richard at work and claims that Freddy changed his appearance to avoid capture, explaining the discrepancy in the wanted poster.
Richard is also visited by Jim Bob Lukea private investigator known by Benwho learns that Fred Russell is tied to several news stories about the shooting death of a burglar.
Jim theorizes that after Freddy became involved with the Dixie Mafia, he was caught by Federal investigators, who faked Freddy's death and placed him in Witness Protection in exchange for information.

Jim, Richard and Ben learn that Freddy might be living in Houston as "Frank Miller" and attempt to meet him at home.
Instead they find home videos which turn out to be snuff films featuring Freddy Russell beating a prostitute to death with a baseball bat.
Richard wants take the tape to the police but Jim believes the police know about the videos but are unconcerned; Freddy is far more valuable as an informant against the Dixie Mafia and the prostitutes are illegal immigrants whom no one will miss.
Ben resolves to kill his own son at any cost.

They track Freddy to a remote mansion where he and his associates are making another snuff film.
They infiltrate the mansion and begin killing everyone they encounter.
When Freddy is the last survivor, Ben hesitates to kill him, leading to Jim getting shot.
Freddy is able to shoot both Richard and Ben before Ben finally wounds him.
Ben declares himself as Freddy's father and shoots his son in the head before bleeding out, himself.
Jim and Richard set the mansion ablaze to conceal the evidence and rescue the hostage prostitute.
Jim recovers from his wounds while Richard returns home to his family.

