In 2044, 25-year-old Joe works for a Kansas City crime syndicate as a "looper."
Since technology in the future has made it almost impossible to successfully dispose of murdered bodies, the syndicates use time travel which was invented in 2074 and subsequently outlawed.
Managed by a man sent from the future named Abe, loopers kill and dispose of victims sent back in time whose faces are hidden by a bag.
They are paid with bars of silver strapped to the target.
To prevent connections to the use of illegal time travel, when a looper is retired, his future self is sent back to 2044 as a target for his younger self, but with gold bars as a payment.
This event is referred to as "closing the loop" and signals the end of a looper's contract.
Failing to close the loop is punishable by execution.

Joe's best friend Seth, part of a minority that has manifested low-level telekinetic abilities, confides that he failed to close his own loop, and that his future self warned him of a mysterious lawless person called the Rainmaker who, in the future, will overthrow the five major crime bosses and end all the loopers' contracts.
Joe reluctantly hides Seth in his apartment's secret floor safe, but the place is searched and Joe is taken to Abe by Kid Blue, one of Abe's elite gangsters known as "Gat Men."
Given the choice of revealing Seth's hiding place or forfeiting half of the silver he has hoarded, Joe betrays Seth.
Abe's men cut an address into Seth's arm, then begin severing parts of his body, causing his older self's body parts to disappear one by one and compelling him to go to the address, where he is then killed.

When Joe's next target arrives, it is his own older self, with his face uncovered.
Before Joe can close his loop, Old Joe shields himself with the gold bars, knocks younger Joe unconscious and escapes.
Returning to his apartment, Young Joe fights with Kid Blue, only to fall off a fire escape and black out.

In another timeline, Young Joe kills his older self as he arrives with a bag on his head.
He moves to Shanghai, where his drug addiction and partying persist.
After running low on money, he becomes a hitman.
Many years later he meets a woman during a bar fight; the two fall in love and marry.
Thirty years after he killed his older self, Joe is taken to close the loop, but his wife is killed in the process.
Overpowering his captors, Joe sends himself back to 2044 unbound and unmasked, and escapes from his younger self, thus creating the alternative timeline.
When Old Joe sees Young Joe fall from the fire escape, he drags him to a safe location.

Memories of both timelines seem to coexist in Old Joe's mind, becoming either clear or dim as their probabilities change.
Old Joe meets with Young Joe at a diner and explains that he is going to kill the Rainmaker as a child to change the future and save his wife.
Kid Blue and several other Gat Men arrive at the diner, and a gunfight ensues.
Young Joe ends up with a corner of Old Joe's map containing one of three locations circled on the map and a number.
Old Joe escapes, and Young Joe runs off into the fields to escape would-be punishment from the Gat Men.

Young Joe heads to the marked place, a farm where Sara and her son Cid live.
Sara recognizes the number on the map as Cid's birthday along with the code of the hospital where he was born.
Young Joe guesses that Old Joe is going to kill all three boys born that day, not knowing which one will become the Rainmaker.
Joe waits at the farm for his older self.

Jesse, another Gat Man, comes looking for both Joes.
Cid successfully hides himself and Young Joe from Jesse; later that night Sara and Young Joe have sex.
In the morning, Young Joe awakes to find that Jesse has returned and has Sara at gunpoint in the living room.
Hearing the arguing, Cid comes down the stairs.
Being frightened by Jesse, Cid falls down the stairs and becomes upset, triggering an enormous telekinetic blast that kills Jesse, revealing that Cid is a powerful telekinetic and the future Rainmaker.
Young Joe realizes that Old Joe now knows Cid's abilities as well.

Kid Blue captures Old Joe and takes him to Abe.
Old Joe breaks free and kills Abe and many of his men.
Old Joe then travels to Sara's farm.
While Young Joe kills Kid Blue, Old Joe pursues Sara and Cid, eventually shooting at Cid, with the bullet grazing his cheek.
Cid creates another telekinetic blast, but is calmed by Sara before he can kill her and Old Joe.
Telling Cid to run into the cane field, Sara stands in Old Joe's line of sight to shield her son.
Young Joe, seeing Old Joe about to shoot Sara, realizes the event will turn Cid into the Rainmaker.
Too far away to prevent it, he kills himself, erasing Old Joe, saving Sara and potentially preventing Cid from becoming the Rainmaker.

