In the winter of 1929, Nick Carraway, a Yale University graduate and World War I veteran, is staying at a psychiatric hospital to treat his alcoholism.
He talks about Jay Gatsby, describing him as the most hopeful man he had ever met.
When he struggles to articulate his thoughts, his doctor, Walter Perkins, suggests writing it down, since writing is Nick's true passion.

In the summer of 1922, Nick moves from the U.S. Midwest to New York, taking a job as a bond salesman after abandoning writing.
He rents a small house on Long Island in the village of West Egg, next door to a lavish mansion belonging to Jay Gatsby, a mysterious business magnate who often holds extravagant parties.
One day, Nick drives across the bay to the old money East Egg to have dinner with his cousin, Daisy Buchanan, and her husband, Tom, a college acquaintance of Nick's.
They introduce Nick to Jordan Baker, a cynical young golfer with whom Daisy wishes to couple Nick.
When Nick returns home, he sees Gatsby on the edge of his dock, reaching out to a mysterious green light coming from the Buchanan's house.

Jordan tells Nick that Tom has a mistress who lives in the "valley of ashes," an industrial dumping ground between West Egg and New York City.
Not long after, Nick travels with Tom to the valley, where they stop by a garage owned by George Wilson and his wife, Myrtle, who is the mistress Jordan mentioned.

As the summer progresses, Nick receives an invitation to one of Gatsby's parties.
Upon arriving, he learns that he is the only one who received an invitation, and that none of the guests have ever met Gatsby.
There are multiple theories as to who he is: a German spy, a prince, even an assassin.
Nick encounters Jordan, and they meet Gatsby, who is surprisingly young and rather aloof.
Gatsby's butler later informs Jordan that Gatsby wishes to speak with her privately.

Gatsby seemingly takes a liking to Nick, and one day Gatsby offers to drive Nick to town in his expensive yellow car.
On the road, Gatsby tells Nick that he is an Oxford man and a war hero, who was born into a wealthy family in the Midwest who have all since died.
Gatsby takes Nick to a speakeasy, where he introduces him to Meyer Wolfsheim, a mob boss and business partner of Gatsby.
Jordan later tells Nick that Gatsby had a relationship with Daisy five years earlier, and is still in love with her.
Gatsby had been throwing the extravagant parties in the hopes Daisy will attend.
Gatsby later asks Nick to invite Daisy to tea at his house, without mentioning that Gatsby will be there.

After an awkward reunion, Gatsby and Daisy begin an affair.
Gatsby is rather dismayed that Daisy wants to run away from New York with him, as his initial plan being for them was to live in his mansion.
Nick tries to explain to Gatsby that the past cannot be repeated, but he dismisses the remark.
Trying to keep the affair a secret, Gatsby fires the majority of his servants and discontinues the parties.
Eventually, he phones Nick and asks that he and Jordan accompany him to the Buchanans', where they plan to tell Tom that Daisy is leaving him.
Nick is hesitant, but Gatsby insists they need him.

During the luncheon, Tom becomes increasingly suspicious of Gatsby when he sees him staring passionately at Daisy.
Daisy stops Gatsby from revealing anything about their relationship, and suggests they all go into town.
Everyone leaves for the Plaza, Tom driving Gatsby's yellow car with Nick and Jordan, while Gatsby and Daisy take Tom's car, which is blue.
Out of gas, Tom stops at George and Myrtle's garage, where George says he and his wife are moving west, telling Tom he suspects Myrtle is cheating on him, not knowing that Tom is Myrtle's lover.

At the Plaza, Gatsby tells Tom that he and Daisy are together, claiming that she never loved him.
Outraged, Tom accuses Gatsby of making his fortune illegally through bootlegging with his mobster friends.
Daisy tells Gatsby that she loved him and still loves him, but she cannot claim that she never loved Tom even once.
Tom promises that he loves Daisy and that he will take better care of Daisy as Daisy reminds him of his faults in their marriage.
As Tom tells Gatsby that he is different from them due to his dubious background, Gatsby lashes out at Tom, frightening Daisy.
She leaves with Gatsby, this time in his car.

Later that night, Myrtle rushes out into the street after a fight with her husband about her infidelity.
She sees Gatsby's yellow car approaching and runs toward it, believing Tom is driving and had come for her.
However, the car strikes her, instantly killing her before fleeing the scene.
Afterwards, Tom, Nick, and Jordan stop by the garage when they see a large crowd has gathered and learn about Myrtle's death.
Tom tells a distraught George the yellow car belongs to Gatsby and that he suspects Gatsby was the one sleeping with Myrtle.

Nick finds Gatsby lingering outside the Buchanans' mansion, where Gatsby accidentally reveals that Daisy was the driver, though he intends to take the blame.
Nick eavesdrops on Daisy and Tom, where he hears Daisy accept Tom's promise that he will take care of everything.
Nick is disappointed, but decides not to tell Gatsby since his friend hopes for Daisy's call.
Gatsby invites Nick over for the night and tells him the truth about his origins: he was born penniless, his real name is James Gatz, and he had asked Daisy to wait for him after the war until he had made something of himself.
He'd then met Meyer Wolfsheim and entered his "business."

The next morning, Nick leaves for work and Gatsby decides to go for a swim before the pool is drained for the season.
He hears the phone ringing, and, believing it is Daisy, climbs out of the pool as the butler answers the phone.
Gatsby is then shot and killed by George, who proceeds to kill himself.

Nick invites Daisy to Gatsby's funeral, only to learn that she, Tom, and their daughter are leaving New York.
The funeral is attended only by reporters and photographers, whom Nick angrily chases out.
The media accuses Gatsby of being Myrtle's lover and the one who killed her, leaving Nick the only person knowing the truth.
Nick realizes that he is the only person who actually cared about Gatsby.
Disgusted with both the city and its people, he leaves New York, but not before taking a final walk through Gatsby's deserted mansion; reflecting on Gatsby's unique ability to hope, and how he lost everything.
Back in the sanatorium, Nick finishes his memoir and titles it "Gatsby," then takes out a pen to re-title it, "The Great Gatsby."

