In 1815, convict Jean Valjean is released on parole by prison guard Javert after serving a nineteen-year sentence for stealing a loaf of bread and numerous escape attempts.
Valjean is refused employment due to his paroled status.
He is offered food and shelter by the Bishop of Digne, but Valjean steals his silver during the night.
When he is captured by the constables, the Bishop tells them that the silver was given as a gift, securing Valjean's release.
The Bishop urges Valjean to do something worthwhile with his life.
Moved by the Bishop's grace, Valjean breaks his parole and vows to start a new life under a new identity.

Eight years later, Valjean has become a factory owner and mayor of Montreuil, Pas-de-Calais, while Javert has been assigned as his new chief of police.
In their initial meeting, Javert suspects Valjean's identity after witnessing his strength as he lifts a heavy cart to free a trapped man.
Meanwhile, Fantine, one of Valjean's workers, is discovered by the other women working there to send money to her illegitimate daughter, Cosette, who lives with the unscrupulous Thnardiers and their daughter ponine.
Outraged that Fantine has spurned his advances, the foreman dismisses her for promiscuity.
In a desperate attempt to support her daughter, Fantine sells her hair and teeth and eventually becomes a prostitute.
She is arrested by Javert after attacking an abusive customer, but is saved by Valjean, who has her hospitalized and watches over her.

Later, Valjean learns that a man believed to be him has been arrested after Javert files a report against the real Valjean only to be told he had already been apprehended.
Because of this, Javert tries to resign his duties, but Valjean refuses, saying that he only did his job.
Finally unable to accept that an innocent man could be condemned in his place, Valjean reveals his identity to the court.
He returns to the hospital, where he vows to Fantine that he will watch over her daughter before she dies.
Javert arrives to take Valjean into custody, but Valjean pleads for enough time to rescue Cosette, which Javert refuses.
After a brief fight and Javert revealing that he was born inside a jail, Valjean jumps into a river to escape.
Cosette lives with the Thenardiers dreaming of having a mother.
The Thenadiers own an inn where they scam the guests and steal their belongings.
He finds Cosette in the woods since the Thenardiers ordered her to draw some water from the well.
Valjean pays Fantine's debts, and leaves with Cosette, promising to be like a father to her.
Valjean and Cosette flee to Paris.The Thnardiers wonder whether they demanded enough money from Valjean, and how much more money he might have.
After Valjean and Cosette escape to a convent, Javert vows to bring the escaped convict to justice.

Nine years later, there is increasing poverty in Paris.
Jean Maximilien Lamarque, the only government official sympathetic towards the poor, is nearing death; therefore a large group of young revolutionary students, known as the Friends of the ABC, plan a rebellion against the French monarchy.
The students consist of Marius Pontmercy, Enjolras, Gavroche, Grantaire, Courfeyrac, Combeferre, Joly, and Jean Prouvaire.
Marius lives in a small room near the Thnardiers and has become friendly with their daughter, ponine, who fell deeply in love with him but was merely considered his best friend.

When Valjean and Cosette are giving alms to the poor, Marius catches a glimpse of Cosette and instantly falls in love.
The Thnardiers also see Valjean and believe they now have their chance to extract more money.
Valjean and Thnardier argue and Javert arrives to intervene.
Valjean and Cosette slip away before Javert can recognize them and Thnardier devises a plot to rob Valjean.
Marius pleads with ponine to find out where Cosette lives so he can see her again.

At the ABC cafe, Enjolras rallies the students when Gavroche brings word that Lamarque has died.
ponine leads Marius to Cosette.
Marius and Cosette profess their love, while ponine laments that her secret love for Marius will go unrequited.
As Marius and Cosette conclude their talk, Thnardier's gang arrives to capture Valjean and earn a reward from Javert.
ponine screams to warn Valjean and Cosette, and Valjean decides to flee, unaware of Cosette's desire for Marius.
Cosette tries to dissuade him, then asks about their pasts.
Valjean declines and she leaves a note for Marius explaining her departure.
ponine finds Cosette's letter to Marius, who becomes dismayed.
He sends a farewell to Cosette and decides to join the revolution.
ponine joins too, disguised as a man, just to be near Marius.
Enjolras urges the Parisians to full revolt.

The next day, the students interrupt Lamarque's funeral procession to begin their revolt and build barricades throughout Paris.
Javert poses as a rebel to spy on them, but is quickly exposed by street child Gavroche and captured.
During the ensuing battle, ponine intervenes in standoff between Marius and a soldier at the cost of her own life.
She gives Marius the letter Cosette wrote and professes her love to him before she dies in his arms, leaving Marius devastated and heartbroken at the loss of his best friend as well as the revelation of her feelings.

Meanwhile, Marius asks Gavroche to deliver a letter to Cosette.
When Gavroche arrives at Valjean's house, Valjean takes the letter and learns of their love.
He abandons his plans to flee the country and instead goes to the barricade to protect Marius.
After saving Enjolras from a sniper, he is given custody of the prisoner, Javert, whom he says he will execute.
However, when the two are alone, Valjean frees Javert who leaves, confused by this act of mercy from a criminal whom he holds in low regard.
The students settle down for the night and reminisce.
Enjolras tells the other students to stay awake in case the enemy strikes unexpectedly in the night, but he tells Marius to get some sleep, knowing he is still too devastated over losing ponine to stay awake.

When the Parisians do not join the revolution as they expected, the students resolve to fight to the death.
Everyone is killed except Marius, who is saved when Valjean drags his unconscious body into the sewers before the army arrives.
Thnardier discovers Marius and Valjean and steals Marius's ring before moving on to scavenge other bodies.
Valjean attacks Thnardier and demands to know the way out.
Thnardier shows the way, and Valjean escapes the sewers carrying Marius, but encounters Javert.
When Valjean asks Javert to take Marius to a doctor, he refuses and threatens to kill him if he does not surrender.
Valjean ignores him and leaves with Marius.
Stunned by Valjean's earlier mercy toward him and his own recent mercy towards Valjean, and unable to reconcile the conflict between his civil and moral duties, two things which he always considered the same, Javert drops his pistol into the sewers and jumps to his death in the Seine.

After recovering at his grandfather's home, Marius mourns his friends, and Cosette comforts him.
Valjean sees that Cosette and Marius are happy together and believes that his presence can only threaten their happiness.
He reveals his past to Marius and tells him he must leave to ensure their safety and happiness.
Marius is shocked, and at first attempts to persuade him to stay, but reluctantly accepts Valjean's decision to leave, promising not to tell Cosette that her father is a fugitive.

Marius and Cosette marry, although Cosette is sad that Valjean is not with them.
The Thnardiers attempt to crash the reception and tell Marius that they saw his father-in-law carrying a murdered corpse through the sewers.
They plan to blackmail him to keep it quiet.
As proof, Thnardier shows Marius the ring that he stole from the murder victim in the sewers.
Recognizing the ring as his own, Marius realizes it was Valjean who saved his life.
The Thnardiers are ejected from the wedding, and Marius and Cosette hurry to find Valjean, who is dying in a local convent.
As he perceives Fantine's spirit arriving to take him to heaven, Cosette and Marius rush in to bid him farewell.
Valjean hands Cosette a letter of his confession of his past life and joins the spirits of the Bishop, Fantine, Enjolras, Grantaire, ponine, Gavroche, Courfeyrac, Joly and the other rebels at the holy barricade.

