The opening screen says: "Some of this actually happened."

In 1978, con artists Irving Rosenfeld and Sydney Prosser have started a relationship and are working together.
Sydney has improved Rosenfeld's scams, posing as English aristocrat "Lady Edith Greensly".
Irving loves Sydney, though is hesitant to leave his unstable wife Rosalyn, fearing he will lose contact with her son Danny, whom Irving has adopted.
Rosalyn has also threatened to report Irving to the police if he leaves her.

FBI agent Richie DiMaso catches Irving and Sydney in a loan scam, but offers to release them if Irving can line up four additional arrests.
Sydney opposes the agreement.
Richie believes Sydney is English but has proof that her claim of aristocracy is fraudulent.
Sydney tells Irving she will manipulate Richie, distancing herself from Irving.

Irving has a friend pretending to be a wealthy Arab sheikh looking for potential investments in America.
An associate of Irving's suggests the sheikh do business with Mayor Carmine Polito of Camden, New Jersey, who is campaigning to revitalize gambling in Atlantic City, New Jersey, but has struggled in fundraising.
Carmine seems to have a genuine desire to help the area's economy and his constituents.

Richie devises a plan to make mayor Polito the target of a sting operation, despite the objections of Irving and of Richie's boss, Stoddard Thorsen .
Sydney helps Richie manipulate an FBI secretary into making an unauthorized wire transfer of $2,000,000.
When Stoddard's boss, Anthony Amado, hears of the operation, he praises Richie's initiative, pressuring Stoddard to continue.

Carmine leaves their meeting when Richie presses him to accept a cash bribe.
Irving convinces Carmine the sheikh is legitimate, expressing his dislike of Richie, and the two become friends.
Richie arranges for Carmine to meet the sheikh, and without consulting the others, has Mexican-American FBI agent Paco Hernandez play the sheikh, which displeases Irving.

Carmine brings the sheikh to a casino party, explaining mobsters are there and it is a necessary part of doing business.
Irving is surprised to hear that Mafia overlord Victor Tellegio, right-hand man to Meyer Lansky, is present, and that he wants to meet the sheikh.
Mafia man Tellegio explains that the business needs the sheikh to become an American citizen and that Carmine will need to expedite the process.
Tellegio also requires a $10,000,000 wire transfer to prove the sheikh's legitimacy.
Richie agrees, eager to bring down Tellegio, while Irving realizes the operation is out of control.

Richie confesses his strong attraction to Sydney but becomes confused and aggressive when she drops her English accent and admits to being American.
Irving arrives to protect Sydney and tries to stop their deal with Richie, but Richie says if they back out, Tellegio will learn of the scam and will murder them all, including Rosalyn and Danny.

Rosalyn starts an affair with a mobster, Pete Musane, whom she met at the party.
She mentions her belief that Irving is working with the Internal Revenue Service, causing Pete to threaten Irving, who promises to prove the sheikh's investment is real.
Irving later confronts Rosalyn, who admits she told Pete.
She agrees to keep quiet but wants a divorce.

With Carmine's help, Richie and Irving videotape members of Congress receiving bribes.
Richie assaults Stoddard in a fight over the money and later convinces Amado that he needs the $10,000,000 to get Tellegio, but gets only $2,000,000.
A meeting is arranged at the offices of Tellegio's lawyer, Alfonse Simone, but Tellegio does not appear.
Richie records Simone's admission of criminal activities.

Irving visits mayor and friend Carmine and admits to the scam, but says he has a plan to help him.
Carmine throws Irving out.
Irving and Sydney meet with Amado, Stoddard and Richie.
The feds inform Irving that their $2,000,000 is missing, and that they have received an anonymous offer to return the money in exchange for Irving and Sydney's immunity and a reduced sentence for Carmine.
Richie accuses Irving of theft.
Irving suggests Richie either has the money or is incompetent for losing it.
In fact, he reveals, they never met with Tellegio's lawyer.
Instead, Irving had a friend, Edward Malone, posing as Simone to con Richie.
Amado accepts the deal with Stoddard removing Richie from the case, which effectively ends his career and drops him back into obscurity.

Irving and Sydney move in together and open a legitimate art gallery, while Rosalyn lives with Pete and shares custody of Danny with Irving.

