Airline pilot captain Whip Whitaker uses cocaine to wake up after a night of very little sleep in his Orlando hotel room.
He pilots SouthJet Flight 227 to Atlanta which experiences severe turbulence at takeoff.
Copilot Ken Evans takes over while Whip discreetly mixes vodka in his orange juice and takes a nap.
He is jolted awake as the plane goes into a steep dive.
Unable to regain control, Whip is forced to make a controlled crash landing in an open field and loses consciousness on impact.

Nearby, heroin addict Nicole Maggen is on the verge of being evicted.
After visiting a drug dealer, she overdoses and has to be wheeled out of the house by a paramedic.
SouthJet Flight 227 flies overhead in the midst of its emergency landing.

Whip awakens in an Atlanta hospital with moderate injuries and is greeted by his old friend Charlie Anderson, who represents the airline's pilots union.
He tells Whip that he managed to save 96 out of 102 people on board, losing two crew members and four passengers, and that his copilot is in a coma.
Whip sneaks away for a cigarette in the stairwell and meets Nicole, who is recovering from her heroin overdose in the same hospital.
The next morning, his friend and drug dealer Harling Mays picks him up from the hospital.

Having retired to his late father's farm, he meets Charlie and attorney Hugh Lang who explain that the National Transportation Safety Board performed a drug test while he was unconscious, and it showed that Whip was intoxicated during the flight.
The results could send him to prison on alcohol, drug, and manslaughter charges.
Hugh promises to get the toxicology report voided on technical grounds.
Meanwhile, Whip visits and soon becomes intimate with Nicole, but Whip's drinking habits clashes with Nicole's attempts to stay off drugs.
Later at a crew member's funeral, he attempts to persuade a flight attendant who survived to tell the NTSB that he was sober on the flight.

Whip hears on the news that co-pilot Ken Evans has come out of his coma and pays him a visit.
He learns that Evans has likely lost his ability to walk unaided and pilot an airplane.
Although upset, Evans states he has no intentions of telling the NTSB that he knew Whip was drunk.
Nicole, who was staying with Whip, decides to leave him after he was unable to break his habits.
Hounding Whip, the media catches him drunk when he spontaneously drove to the home of his ex-wife and son, both of whom resent him.
He drives to Charlie's house begging to stay until the NTSB hearing, vowing not to drink.
The night before the hearing, Charlie and Hugh move Whip to a guarded hotel room to prevent him from drinking.
Although his minibar contains no alcohol, he finds the door to the adjacent room unlocked and raids its minibar instead.

Charlie and Hugh discover him the next morning, passed out and still drunk.
They call Harling, who revives him with cocaine.
At the hearing, Ellen Block, the lead NTSB investigator, explains that a damaged elevator assembly jackscrew was the primary cause of the crash.
She commends Whip on his valor and skill, explaining that no other pilots were able to land the plane in trial simulations of the crash.
She then reveals that two empty vodka bottles were found in the trash of the plane, noting that Whip's test was excluded for technical reasons and that the only other member of the crew to test positive for alcohol was Trina, one of the flight attendants who died in the crash.
Whip, unable to bring himself to blame Trina for his actions, admits to being intoxicated the day of the crash.

Thirteen months later, an imprisoned Whip tells a support group of fellow inmates that he's glad to be sober and doesn't regret doing the right thing.
Whip is seen looking at pictures of Nicole, family, and friends on the wall of his cell, along with greeting cards congratulating him on being sober for a year.
He is working to rebuild his relationship with his son, who visits to talk with him about a college application essay on "the most fascinating person that I've never met."
His son begins by asking, "Who are you?"
As a plane flies overhead, Whip replies, "That's a good question."

