The day of his fifth wedding anniversary, Nick Dunne returns home to find that his wife Amy is missing.
Her disappearance receives heavy press coverage, as Amy was the inspiration for her parents' popular "Amazing Amy" children's books.
Detective Rhonda Boney does a walkthrough of their house and finds poorly concealed evidence of a struggle.
The police conduct a forensic analysis and uncover the remnants of cleaned blood stains, leading to the conclusion that Amy was murdered.
Suspicions arise that Nick is responsible, and his awkward behavior is interpreted by the media as characteristic of a sociopath.

Flashbacks reveal that Nick and Amy's marriage has disintegrated; both lost their jobs in the recession and moved from New York City to North Carthage, Missouri.
Nick has become lazy, distant, uninterested and unfaithful.
Detective Boney unearths evidence of financial troubles and domestic disputes, and a witness states that Amy wanted to purchase a gun.
She also finds a medical report indicating that Amy is pregnant, of which Nick denies knowledge.

Amy is revealed to be alive and well, having changed her appearance and gone into hiding in a distant campground.
She despises Nick for the erosion of their marital bliss, her isolation after they moved to be closer to Nick's family, and his infidelity.
Amy planned the framing in great detail: she befriended a pregnant neighbor to steal her urine for the pregnancy test, drained her own blood to leave trace evidence of murder and fabricated a diary describing her fear of Nick.
By using the clues in a "treasure hunt" game she and Nick play on their anniversary, she ensures he visits places where she has planted the corroborating evidence of Nick's guilt for the police to discover.
She anticipates Nick will be convicted and executed for her murder, and contemplates committing suicide after his conviction.

Nick hires Tanner Bolt, a lawyer who specializes in defending men accused of killing their wives.
Nick meets Amy's ex-boyfriend Tommy O'Hara, who claims Amy framed him for rape.
He also approaches another ex-boyfriend, the wealthy Desi Collingsagainst whom Amy previously filed a restraining orderbut Desi refuses to share any details.
When Amy's neighbors at the campground rob her of her remaining money, she calls Desi: she convinces him that she ran away from Nick because she feared for her life.
He agrees to hide her in his lake house, which is equipped with surveillance cameras.

Nick convinces his twin sister, Margo, of his innocence.
After Nick's mistress, his student, reveals their affair at a press conference, Nick appears on a talk show to profess his innocence and apologize for his failures as a husband in the hope of luring Amy.
His performance rekindles Amy's feelings for him, even as Boney formally charges him with murder.
Amy inflicts injuries on herself and uses the surveillance cameras to her advantage, making it appear that Desi kidnapped and abused her.
She seduces Desi and kills him during sex by slitting his throat, then returns home covered in blood, naming Desi as her captor and rapist and clearing Nick of suspicion.

When Boney questions Amy about the holes in her story, she sharply responds that Nick would have ended up on Missouri's death row and she would have remained Desi's victim because of Boney's incompetence.
The FBI sides with Amy, forcing Boney to back down.

Amy tells Nick the truth, saying that the man she watched pleading for her return on TV is the man she wants him to become again.
Nick shares this with Boney, Bolt, and Margo, but they have no way to prove Amy's guilt.
Nick intends to leave Amy and expose her lies, but Amy reveals she is pregnant, having artificially inseminated herself with Nick's sperm stored at a fertility clinic.
Nick doubts the child is his and says he will undertake a paternity test.

Nick reacts violently to Amy's insistence that they remain married, but feels responsible for the child.
Despite Margo's objections, he reluctantly decides to stay with Amy.
The "happy" couple announces on television that they are expecting a baby.

