The movie opens with Gary, a 15-year-old drifter, lecturing his father, Wade, on getting a job and not destroying anything good that comes their way.
Wade turns to Gary, punches him in the face and walks off, only to be met by two men who likewise beat him, much more brutally.

Joe Ransom is a foreman for a small tree-removal crew in backwoods Texas.
He is well-liked by the residents of the town and his crew, but has a long string of incarcerations due to his violent behaviour and disrespect for the law.
He lives in self-imposed emotional isolation, frequenting a local brothel.

Gary asks Joe for a job, soon impressing him with his work ethic.
However, when Gary brings his father with him the next day, Wade's attitude and utter lack of work ethic gets them both fired.
Gary later goes to Joe's house to talk him into rehiring him.
Joe agrees, and Gary begins working for him regularly.
Wade routinely beats Gary and takes his salary, forcing Gary to hide his earnings.

Gary meets Willie, with whom Joe has already had a series of violent encounters.
When Willie ask Gary whether he has a sister, and makes lewd comments about her, Gary attacks him.
Seeking revenge, Willie finds Wade and bribes him for a liaison with Dorothy.
Wade accepts and takes Dorothy with Gary's truck.
Gary comes to Joe, promising that he will kill his father for what he has done.
Joe tries to calm him, but agrees to accompany Gary to retrieve his sister.

Wade and Willie meet at a desolate place, where Willie is ready to presumably rape Dorothy.
Joe arrives and intervenes, ready to execute Willie, but he is shot by one of Willie's thugs.
He shoots and kills them both, but is severely wounded.
He staggers towards Wade, ready to shoot him as well, but runs out of rounds.
Wade calmly acknowledges Joe, and jumps off a bridge to his death.
Joe then collapses and as he lies dying Gary returns with the police.
Gary runs to Joe and hugs him - a clear act of love, unsoiled by ulterior motives or expectations, in sharp contrast to Joe's frequent visits to the local brothel - for all that Joe has done for him as Joe dies knowing he kept Gary from going down the wrong path.

In the epilogue, Gary inherits Joe's truck and loyal dog, as well as a new job replanting the forest Joe worked on removing.

