Jasmine disembarks in San Francisco after a flight from New York City.
A passenger who had been sitting next to her on the flight tells her husband that Jasmine had been talking to herself the whole way.
Jasmine takes a taxi to her sister Ginger's apartment, where Ginger is shocked to learn that Jasmine traveled first class despite claiming to be broke.

Jasmine reflects on the life that she has lost and tries to start a new one, but she is constantly drawn back into her expensive habits.
In flashbacks, she remembers her past life in New York with her husband Hal, a wealthy businessman.

Some years previously, Ginger and her working-class husband Augie visited New York, their first time there in many years.
Jasmine provides a car and driver for them to tour the city and pays for a stay in a hotel to avoid spending any time with them.
Ginger announces they have won $200,000 in the lottery that Augie intends to use to start a construction business, but Jasmine offers Hal's help in investing the money instead.
While touring New York, Ginger sees Hal kiss another woman.
The woman later appears at Jasmine's birthday party.
Ginger debates whether to say anything to Jasmine; but she decides to stay quiet, hoping to spare her sister's marriage.

After Hal is reported to the authorities as a major fraudster who has lost a lot of money for many investors, including Ginger and Augie, Ginger defends Jasmine, but Augie blames her for ruining his life.
Hal commits suicide after being sent to prison for fraud.
Ginger divorces Augie and begins dating a mechanic called Chili .
Jasmine, meanwhile, suffers a nervous breakdown and is briefly hospitalized before coming to San Francisco.

Jasmine considers becoming an interior designer.
She needs to take an online class but has no computer skills.
She takes a job with a dentist, who pesters her with unwanted sexual advances.
She fights him off and quits.

Jasmine's situation improves when she meets a wealthy widower, Dwight, at a party.
Dwight is a diplomat who aspires to become a Congressman.
Ginger begins a romance with Al, whom she met at the same party.
She breaks up with Chili, who begs her not to leave him.
Eventually, however, she finds out that Al is married, and reunites with Chili.

Jasmine lies about her past life, telling Dwight her husband was a surgeon who died of a heart attack.
Dwight is about to buy her an engagement ring when they bump into Augie outside the jewelry store.
Augie rails at Jasmine about what Hal did to Ginger and him.
Augie also reveals that Jasmine's estranged stepson, Danny, is living nearby in Oakland.
Dwight is outraged with Jasmine's dishonesty and calls off the engagement.
Jasmine goes to Oakland and finds Danny, who tells Jasmine he never wants to see her again.

In a flashback, it is seen how Jasmine finally learned of Hal's many affairs and confronted him.
Hearing that Hal wants to leave her for a teenage au pair, Jasmine, in a moment of blind rage, calls the FBI to inform the authorities of Hal's fraudulent business dealings.
This leads to his arrest.

Jasmine returns to her sister's apartment and finds Ginger back with Chili.
Jasmine and Chili needle each other, and Jasmine is furious when Ginger takes his side.
Jasmine lies to Ginger and claims she is going to marry Dwight and is moving out, and leaves the apartment saying she will "send for her luggage."
In the final scene, Jasmine sits on a park bench, talking to herself about her troubles.

