In 1977, Harry Burns (Crystal) and Sally Albright (Ryan) graduate from the University of Chicago and share the drive to New York City, where Sally is beginning Journalism school and Harry is starting a career; at the time, Harry is dating a friend of Sally's, Amanda (Nicastro).

During the drive, they discuss their differing ideas about relationships between men and women. Harry says that "Men and women can't be friends because the sex part always gets in the way". Sally disagrees, claiming that men and women can be strictly friends without sex. During a stop in a diner, Sally is angered when Harry tells her she is attractive; she accuses him of making a pass at her. In New York, because of their divergent philosophies, they part on unfriendly terms.

Five years later, they meet in a New York airport and find themselves on the same plane. Both are in relationships; Sally has just started dating a man named Joe (Ford)  who is a neighbor of Harry's  and Harry is engaged to a woman named Helen, which surprises Sally. Harry suggests they become friends, forcing him to elaborate on his previous rule about the impossibility of male-female friendships. Despite Harry's suggestions of exceptions to that rule, they eventually separate, concluding that they will not be friends.

Harry and Sally run into each other again five years later, in a New York bookstore. They have coffee and talk about their previous relationships, both of which have ended, with Sally and Joe breaking up because she realized she wanted a family and he didn't want to get married, and Harry's because Helen fell in love with another man. After leaving the caf, they take a walk and decide to be friends. In subsequent scenes, they have late-night phone conversations, go to dinner, and spend a lot of time together. Their dating experiences with others continue to highlight their different approaches to relationships and sex.

During a New Year's Eve party, Harry and Sally find themselves attracted to each other. Though they remain friends, they set each other up with their respective best friends, Marie (Fisher) and Jess (Kirby). The four go to a restaurant, where Marie and Jess hit it off and later become engaged. One night, over the phone, Sally tearfully tells Harry that her ex, is going to marry a paralegal. He rushes to her apartment to comfort her; and they unexpectedly have sex, resulting in an awkward moment the next morning as Harry quickly leaves in a state of distress. This creates tension in their relationship. Their friendship cools for three weeks until the two have a heated argument during Jess and Marie's wedding dinner. Following this fight, Harry repeatedly attempts to mend his friendship with Sally, but she feels that they cannot be friends after what happened.

Then, at a New Year's Eve party that year, Sally feels alone without Harry by her side. Meanwhile, Harry is shown spending New Year's alone as he walks around the city. As she decides to leave the party early, Harry appears and declares his love for her; and at first she argues that the only reason he is there because he is lonely, but he disagrees and lists the many things he realized he loves about her, and they make up and kiss, and in a short closing scene after that shows them being interviewed together, and they say that they had gotten married three months later after that night.