Facing foreclosure of their homes in the Goon Docks area of Astoria, Oregon to an expanding country club, a group of children called the "Goonies" gathers for a last weekend. The Goonies include optimist Mikey Walsh, his older brother Brand, the inventive Data, the talkative Mouth, and the overweight klutz Chunk. While rummaging through the Walshes' attic, they come across an old treasure map and a 1632 doubloon, that shows the whereabouts of a treasure, of a famous pirate, named "One-Eyed" Willy, which is rumored to be hidden nearby. Evading Brand for one last adventure together, the kids find themselves at a derelict restaurant near the coast, which coincides with the doubloon and the map. They encounter the Fratellis, a family of criminals hiding out at the abandoned restaurant. Evading detection by returning outside, the kids run into Brand and two girls: the popular cheerleader Andy, who has a crush on Brand, who shares the same feelings for her, and Stef, a nerdy, tough-talking girl and Andy's best friend.

Mikey convinces Brand to return to the restaurant to explore after the Fratellis leave, discovering that the criminals are running a counterfeiting operation. As the Fratellis return, the group finds a tunnel beneath the restaurant and hides in there, sending Chunk to notify the authorities. They explore the tunnel and find the remains of a previous treasure explorer, who also searched for the treasure, and Mikey is sure they are on the right trail. Evading various booby traps, set up by Willy, they find themselves under an old wishing well. The kids have a chance to be pulled out of the tunnel by Andy's obnoxious boyfriend Troy, whose family owns the country club, and his friends, but Mikey convinces the group to continue on their journey. Meanwhile, Chunk escapes the cave and tries to call for help, but in the process of doing so, he ends up getting kidnapped by Jake and Francis when he accidentally comes across their car. The Fratellis interrogate and threaten a terrified Chunk, forcing him to reveal (among other things he has done), the existence of the treasure. When the Fratellis refuse to believe him and attempt to shred his hands in an active blender, they are stopped by a pack of bats that fly out of the tunnel, revealing the truth. Although the Fratellis spare Chunk's life, they tie him up in a chair and lock him in the basement next to Sloth, their deformed younger brother chained-up and pursue the other group. Chunk befriends Sloth, and Sloth is able to break his chains, free Chunk and escape the basement.

Mikey and the others discover the Fratellis on their tail, and hasten through the remaining traps. They ultimately find an enclosed grotto where "One-Eyed" Willy's pirate ship The Inferno rests. They explore the ship, finding a hoard of treasure in front of the skeletal remains of Willy and his crew. Mikey gives a sober speech to Willy, naming him as the first "Goonie", then he and the others fill their pockets with riches; Mikey insists that the coins in front of Willy remain untouched, as Willy's tribute. The Fratellis are waiting for them as they leave. The criminals make them drop the treasure before threatening to kill them by forcing them to play pirate, when suddenly Sloth and Chunk arrive. Sloth, angered by how the other Fratellis have treated him in the past, easily subdues them and helps the rest of the Goonies to escape the boat. Though Mikey insists they go back for the treasure, Brand worries more for their lives, and the group escapes through a hole in the grotto, eventually arriving on a nearby beach shore. Police quickly come to their help and reunite them with their families.

Meanwhile, the Fratellis free themselves and begin to loot the boat. When they take the coins that Mikey had left earlier, they trip another trap that causes the grotto to start to cave in. The Fratellis are forced to abandon the loot and flee to the beach, where police quickly take them into custody. As the Goonies are taken care of by their families, including Chunk offering to bring Sloth into his family, the owners of the country club show up and demand that Mr. Walsh sign away their home. As he is about to do so, their housekeeper Rosita finds Mikey's marble bag in his wet clothes, filled with gems that the Fratellis had not found, and Mouth stops him from signing the paperwork. Mr. Walsh recognizes the value of the gems and tears up the paperwork, having enough money to save all of the Goon Docks. As the Goonies celebrate, they watch as The Inferno, clear of the grotto, travels out towards the ocean under full sail.