Sam Wheat (Patrick Swayze), a banker and Molly Jensen (Demi Moore), a potter, are a couple who renovate and move into an apartment in New York City with the help of Sam's friend Carl Bruner (Tony Goldwyn). One afternoon, Sam makes the discovery of unusually high balances in obscure bank accounts, but despite Carl's offer to help investigate, Sam decides to investigate on his own. That night, while walking home, Sam and Molly are mugged by a street thug who pulls a gun and demand's Sam's wallet. Sam struggles with the attacker and is shot. After pursuing the street thug, Sam runs back to Molly and discovers that he has died from the gunshot and become a ghost after seeing Molly crying over his dead body. Sam stays by a distraught Molly, trying to come to grips with his condition, when Carl comes over and suggests they take a walk, but Sam cannot bring himself to follow. Moments later, the mugger enters the apartment, evidently searching for something. When Molly returns, Sam scares their cat into attacking the thug, who flees. Following him to his apartment in Brooklyn, Sam learns that the man's name is Willie Lopez and he was looking for something in Sam's apartment and will return to find it later. Sam happens upon the parlor of Oda Mae Brown (Whoopi Goldberg); a con artist posing as a medium who realizes she has an actual gift when she can hear Sam. He convinces her of the danger that Molly is in and to warn her. She is met by skepticism until she relays information that only Sam would know.

When Molly goes to the police, they show her Oda Mae's record, convincing Molly that she is a con artist. She tells this information to Carl, and he and Sam go to visit Willie, but to Sam's surprise, Carl and Willie are working together and he'd had a hand in Sam's death to obtain his book of passwords in order to access and launder the excess money from the bank accounts. Meeting a violent poltergeist, Sam convinces him to teach him how to manipulate objects physically. After learning to harness this ability, he approaches Oda Mae and advises her to withdraw the money in the fake name that Carl had set up, then give the $4 million to charity to prevent being caught. Sam tries to scare Carl away from Molly, but she lets it slip that Oda Mae was at the bank withdrawing the money. Sam prevents Oda Mae from being caught by Willie by terrorizing him and sending him into oncoming traffic. Willie is hit by a car and killed, and his ghost is grabbed by creatures in the shadows that drag him to Hell. Returning to the apartment, Sam convinces Molly that Oda Mae is telling the truth about him by levitating a penny into her hand.

Oda Mae allows Sam to possess her body, so he and Molly can share a slow dance, but Carl interrupts them and Molly and Oda Mae flee onto the fire escape. Carl chases the women to a loft under construction and catches Oda Mae. When Molly comes to save her, she is grabbed and held hostage. Sam disarms Carl and chases him toward a window. He throws a hook at Sam, which swings back and shatters the glass, and as Carl tries to climb through the window, it falls, impaling him through the chest. Carl's ghost rises from his body and, as with Willie, he is grabbed by the creatures from the shadows and carried to Hell. When Sam asks if the women are all right, Molly can hear him. A heavenly light shines in the room, illuminating Sam, and they both see him. Realizing that it is his time to go, he and Molly share tearful goodbyes. Oda Mae tells him that he is being called home, and he thanks her for her help. Sam then walks into the light and onward to Heaven.