In 1991 Los Angeles, slacker Jeff "the Dude" Lebowski (Jeff Bridges) is assaulted in his home by two thugs (Mark Pellegrino and Philip Moon) who demand money that the wife of a Jeffrey Lebowski owes to a man named Jackie Treehorn (Ben Gazzara). The two soon realize they have attacked the wrong Jeffrey Lebowski and leave, but not before one of them urinates on The Dude's rug.

The Dude meets his bowling friends, the timid Donny (Steve Buscemi) and the temperamental Vietnam veteran Walter Sobchak (John Goodman). Encouraged by Walter, the Dude approaches the other Jeffrey Lebowski (David Huddleston), the eponymous "Big Lebowski", a cantankerous elderly millionaire in a wheelchair, to seek compensation for his ruined rug. This request is promptly refused. He craftily steals one of Lebowski's rugs by telling Brandt (Philip Seymour Hoffman), Lebowski's sycophantic assistant, that his boss told him to take any rug in the house. The Dude subsequently meets Bunny (Tara Reid), Lebowski's young nymphomaniacal trophy wife.

Days later, Lebowski contacts the Dude stating that Bunny has been kidnapped. Lebowski wants the Dude to deliver a briefcase containing a million dollar ransom and see if he can recognize the culprits. Later, a different pair of thugs appear in the Dude's apartment, knock him unconscious, and take Lebowski's rug. When Bunny's kidnappers call to arrange delivery of the ransom, Walter suggests they give the kidnappers a "ringer" briefcase filled with dirty laundry instead. The kidnappers grab the ringer and leave. Later that night, the Dude's car is stolen, with the ransom briefcase still inside.

Jeffrey Lebowski's daughter Maude (Julianne Moore) contacts the Dude and reveals she hired the thugs who took the rug, explaining that Bunny is one of Jackie Treehorn's porn stars. She reckons that Bunny "kidnapped" herself and asks the Dude to recover the ransom which Lebowski illegally withdrew from the family's foundation. Lebowski is angry that the Dude failed to deliver the ransom and shows him what is apparently Bunny's severed toe, delivered by the kidnappers. Later, a gang of German nihilists (Peter Stormare, Torsten Voges, and Flea) invade the Dude's apartment and threaten him, identifying themselves as the kidnappers. Maude says the German nihilists are actually Bunny's friends.

The Dude is forcibly brought before Treehorn, who asks about the whereabouts of Bunny and says he wants the money she owes him. He drugs the Dude's White Russian cocktail, leading to an unconscious dream sequence involving Maude and bowling. The Dude comes to in police custody, where he is verbally and physically assaulted by the Malibu police chief. During the cab ride home, the Dude gets thrown out after a trivial argument with the driver about the Eagles. A red sports car zooms past; Bunny is driving, with all her toes intact.

The Dude finds his bungalow completely trashed and is greeted by Maude, who seduces him. He figures that Treehorn drugged him so that his goons could look for the ransom money at the Dude's home. After Maude has sex with him, she says she hopes to conceive a child; the Dude is about to protest the idea of being a father when Maude tells him that he won't have a hand in the child's upbringing. Maude also explains that her father has no money: her mother was the wealthy one and she left her money exclusively to the family charity. The Dude later tells Walter that he now understands the whole story: when Lebowski heard that Bunny was kidnapped, he withdrew money from the foundation, kept it for himself, and gave the Dude a briefcase without any money in it, saying that it contained a million dollar ransom. The kidnapping was also a ruse: when Bunny took an unannounced trip, her friendsthe nihilistspurported a kidnapping to be able to extort money from Lebowski.

The affair apparently over, the Dude and his bowling teammates return to the bowling alley. When they leave, they are confronted in the parking lot by the nihilists who have set the Dude's car on fire. They once again demand the ransom money. After hearing what the Dude and Walter know, the nihilists try to mug them anyway. Walter violently overcomes all three of them. However, in the excitement, Donny suffers a fatal heart attack.

Walter and the Dude go to the beach to scatter Donny's ashes. Walter turns an informal eulogy into a tribute to the Vietnam War. After accidentally covering the Dude with Donny's ashes, and after a brief argument, Walter hugs him and says, "Come on. Fuck it, man. Let's go bowling." At the bowling alley, the story's narrator (Sam Elliott) tells the viewer that Maude is pregnant with a "little Lebowski" and expresses his hope that the Dude and Walter will win the bowling tournament.