In 1869, two brothers bury a mysterious chest that emits drumbeats. A century later, 12-year-old Alan Parrish escapes from a group of bullies to a shoe factory owned by his father, Samuel Parrish. When Alan accidentally damages a machine, Sam's employee and Alan's friend Carl Bentley is dismissed. The bullies attack Alan and steal his bicycle. Alan follows the sound of tribal drumbeats to a construction site, where he finds a chest containing a board game called Jumanji, and takes the game home.

After an argument with his father about attending a boarding school, Alan plans to run away until his friend Sarah arrives to return his bicycle, and they begin playing Jumanji. With each roll of the dice, the player's piece moves by itself and a cryptic message appears in a crystal ball in the center of the board describing the outcome of the roll. Alan's first roll results in a message telling him that he will spend time in a desolate place until someone rolls 5 or 8. Alan is sucked into the board, and a colony of bats forces Sarah out of the house.

Twenty-six years later, Judy and Peter Shepherd move into the vacant Parrish house with their Aunt Nora after their parents Jim and Martha died in an automobile accident. Judy and Peter hear Jumanji's drumbeats and play the game in the attic, causing giant mosquitoes to attack, then a troop of monkeys wreck the kitchen. The game states that everything will be restored when it ends, so they continue playing. Peter's next roll, which is a 5, releases both a lion and an adult Alan. Alan locks the lion in a bedroom and heads to his father's factory. On the way, he meets Carl, who has become a police officer. In the now abandoned factory, a homeless man reveals that Samuel was distraught after Alan's disappearance and abandoned the business, putting all of his time and wealth into searching for him, to search for him until his death four years earlier. The factory's closure has devastated the town's economy.

While watching Judy and Peter play, Alan soon realizes that they are continuing the game that he and Sarah started, and he joins the game. Upon discovering a devastated Sarah, they persuade her to help finish the game. Sarah's move releases fast-growing man-eating vines, and Alan's next roll causes a big game hunter named Van Pelt to hunt Alan, until he runs out of ammunition, but he later buys a new gun. When Van Pelt returns, he steals the game to lure Alan to him. Peter, Sarah, and Judy follow him to a department store where they fight him, causing chaos in the process, but they manage to retrieve the game, but when the four return to the mansion  now completely overrun by jungle wildlife  they release one calamity after another, until finally an earthquake destroys the house. As Van Pelt corners Alan and prepares to kill him, Alan makes the winning roll, causing everything that has happened as a result of the game to be reversed.

After returning to 1969, Alan and Sarah are children once again, but have full memories of the game's events. Alan reconciles with Sam and admits that he, and not Carl damaged the factory's machine. Carl is rehired, and Sam tells his son that he does not have to attend the boarding school. Realizing that Judy and Peter have not yet been born, Alan and Sarah throw the Jumanji board into a river, weighed down with bricks. Sarah and Alan begin a romantic relationship as they kiss.

In the present, Alan and Sarah are now married and expecting their first child, and Carl still works for the factory as a supervisor. Alan and Sarah meet the Shepherds for the first time at a Christmas party. Alan and Sarah offer Jim a job at Parrish Shoes, which Alan took over after his father retired (but he is still alive), convincing him and Martha to cancel their upcoming skiing trip to Canada, thereby preventing their deaths.

At a beach in another part of the world, two young French-speaking girls hear drumbeats while walking, as Jumanji lies buried in the sand.