A joint operation between American and Russian Special Forces leads to the capture of General Ivan Radek (Jrgen Prochnow), the dictator of a rogue terrorist regime in Kazakhstan that had possession of stolen Soviet nuclear weapons. Three weeks later, President of the United States James Marshall (Harrison Ford) is invited to Moscow for a diplomatic dinner, during which he praises the capture and insists the United States will never negotiate with terrorists. Marshall and his entourage, including his wife Grace (Wendy Crewson) and daughter Alice (Liesel Matthews), and several of his Cabinet and advisers, prepare to return to the United States on Air Force One. In addition, a number of press corps have been invited aboard.

After takeoff, U.S. Secret Service agent Gibbs (Xander Berkeley), acting as a mole, enables a group of six Russian Radek loyalists, posed as a press corps, to obtain weapons and take over the plane, killing many of the other agents and other military personnel while taking the civilians hostage. Marshall is raced to an escape pod in the cargo hold while pursued by the loyalists' leader, Ivan Korshunov (Gary Oldman). Korshunov arrives too late as the pod is ejected, and returns to the main deck to secure Grace and Alice separate from the other hostages. Unknown to Korshunov, Marshall, a Medal of Honor recipient, remained hidden in the cargo hold instead of using the pod, and begins to observe the loyalists using his military training.

Korshunov contacts Vice President Kathryn Bennett (Glenn Close) with his demand to arrange the release of Radek or he will kill a hostage every half-hour. Marshall uses a fax machine with which he contacts Bennett. With help of military advisers, they devise a plan to release the hostages by forcing Air Force One to a lower mid-air refueling altitude by having Marshall dump the plane's fuel; from there, the hostages can parachute safely off the plane. As Korshunov and his pilot dock with the KC-10 tanker, Marshall subdues the other loyalists, frees the hostages, and helps escort them to the cargo hold. Korshunov realizes the deception, and in his haste to disconnect from the tanker, causes the fuel to ignite, destroying the tanker. Korshunov arrives as the last of the hostages are freed. He prevents Marshall, Chief of Staff Lloyd Shepherd (Paul Guilfoyle), Major Caldwell (William H. Macy), and Gibbs from escaping.

With the President and his family under his control, Korshunov forces Marshall to contact Russian President Petrov and arrange for Radek's release. Bennett is urged by Defense Secretary Walter Dean (Dean Stockwell) to declare the President incapable under the 25th amendment so as to override Radek's release, but she refuses. As the news of Radek's release reaches Air Force One, Korshunov and his men celebrate, giving Marshall the opportunity to break his bonds, kill Korshunov's men, and throw Korshunov off the plane when he tries to escape himself. Marshall races back to rescind his order, and Radek is subsequently killed when he attempts to escape.

Marshall and Major Caldwell direct the plane back to friendly airspace accompanied by U.S. F-15s, but they are quickly tailed by MiG-29s piloted by other Radek loyalists that try to shoot down the plane. Marshall is able to evade most of the missile launches, while one F-15 pilot sacrifices himself to intercept a missile; the resulting explosion tears apart the plane's tail, and they quickly start to lose altitude. A standby USAF Rescue HC-130 is called to help, sending parajumpers on tether lines to help rescue the survivors. Marshall insists that his family and the injured Shepherd be transferred first. They are told there is time for only one more transfer, at which point Gibbs reveals himself as the mole, killing Caldwell and the parajumper. Marshall and Gibbs fight for control of the transfer line, and Marshall manages to grab and detach it at the last minute. Gibbs is killed as Air Force One crashes into the Caspian Sea. The HC-130 airmen reel Marshall in, where he reunites with his family. With the President safe, the HC-130 is temporarily renamed "Air Force One" as they fly back to friendly space.