Men in Black (M.I.B.) is a secret non-government agency that polices and monitors extraterrestrial activity on Earth and keeps it secret from the public. The agency operates from an underground base at a Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ventilation station in Battery Park, New York City. MIB members use neuralyzers to erase witnesses' memories of alien sightings. The MIB is monitoring about 1500 aliens around the world, most of them in the vicinity of New York City.

One night, Agent K (Tommy Lee Jones) and his partner, Agent D (Richard Hamilton) intercept a truck containing illegal immigrants and Mikey, an extraterrestrial disguised as a human who attempts to pass to the United States. Mikey starts to run and K is forced to kill it when it tries to attack a border patrol officer, and K is forced to neuralyze him. D, realizing that he is too old, asks K to neuralyze him into "retirement." Later, the MIB leader Zed (Rip Torn) suggests that K search for a new partner.

Meanwhile, James Edwards (Will Smith) is a New York Police Department officer pursuing a crime suspect on foot. While chasing the incredibly fast and agile fugitive over the rooftops, Edwards sees the man's irises blink horizontally, and realizes he is not human. The fugitive then commits suicide by jumping off the roof. K arrives at the precinct station, questions Edwards before neuralyzing him, and leaves the cop an MIB business card. Later, Edwards goes to the secret headquarters and competes with several others to qualify to join the MIB. After the tests, K takes him aside (while the others are neuralyzed) and offers him the position. Edwards accepts and his identity is erased, becoming Agent J.

Suspicious of why extraterrestrials are suddenly leaving the planet en masse, the M.I.B. investigate a farmer named Edgar (Vincent D'Onofrio), who has been acting strangely after an alien craft crashed on his farm. Edgar has been killed and his skin used as a disguise by a "Bug," a member of a giant cockroach-like species that are at war with several other alien races, including the Arquillians. An Arquillian prince hiding in Brooklyn who is disguised as a human jewelry store owner named Rosenberg is attacked along with his alien friend, and tells J as he dies that "the galaxy is on Orion's belt."

M.I.B. informant Frank the Pug (Tim Blaney), a Remoolian disguised as a small lapdog, explains that the missing galaxy is a massive source of energy housed in a small jewel. Edgar the Bug figures out the galaxy is hanging on the collar of Rosenberg's cat Orion, which refuses to leave the prince's body at the morgue. Orion has been taken care of by Dr. Laurel Weaver (Linda Fiorentino). J arrives at the morgue just as Edgar kidnaps Weaver and grabs the galaxy. The Arquillians deliver an ultimatum to M.I.B. to secure the galaxy within an hour, or they will destroy Earth to keep the galaxy away from the Bug species.

Edgar the Bug arrives at the site of two disguised flying saucers, the observation towers of the New York State Pavilion at Flushing Meadows, and forces Weaver to come along with him, but she refuses, saying she wants to stay where she is. The Bug escapes on one saucer, but K and J are close behind and fire more powerful weapons, destroying the ship. The Bug sheds Edgar's skin and swallows J and K's guns. K tells J to stop the Bug from getting onto the other ship, then insults the Bug until he too is swallowed. J messes with the Bug by crushing cockroaches and saying they are his relatives, provoking the extraterrestrial.

The Bug is blown open from the inside by K, who located his gun in the Bug's stomach. As J and K sit on the ground covered in slime, the insect tries to attack again, but is destroyed by Weaver, using J's gun. The three return to M.I.B. headquarters and K tells J that he has not been training him as a partner, but rather as a replacement. J, upon K's request, neuralyzes K, using a coma cover story to allow him to return to his civilian life and the young woman he left behind after he became an agent. A few days later, it is revealed that Weaver also joined M.I.B. and is now J's new partner, Agent L.

The camera rapidly pulls back, showing that Earth and the Milky Way galaxy are also inside an alien jewel being used as a marble in a cosmic game.