In the winter of 1987, Minneapolis car salesman Jerry Lundegaard (William H. Macy) is desperate for money. With help from Shep Proudfoot (Steve Reevis), an ex-convict and mechanic co-worker, Jerry is introduced to criminals Carl Showalter (Steve Buscemi) and Gaear Grimsrud (Peter Stormare). Jerry travels to Fargo, North Dakota to meet and hire the two men to kidnap his wife, Jean (Kristin Rudrd), and ransom her for $80,000 to his wealthy father-in-law and boss, Wade Gustafson (Harve Presnell). In exchange, Jerry will provide Carl and Gaear with a new 1987 Oldsmobile Cutlass Ciera and half of the ransom money. However, Jerry secretly intends to tell Wade that the ransom demand is for $1,000,000 so he can give $40,000 to Carl and Gaear and keep the rest of the money for himself. Unknown to everyone else, one of the reasons that Jerry is desperate for money is that he is also running a finance fraud scam with the car dealership's finance company GMAC where he recently took a $320,000 loan for a batch of non-existent vehicles that he claims were sold from the dealership. A GMAC company rep has been demanding that Jerry produce evidence of the dealership sales or GMAC will call back the loans on the vehicles.

Meanwhile, Jerry has been trying to convince Wade to lend him $750,000 for a real estate deal to build a parking lot. As Wade becomes interested in the investment, Jerry tries to call off the kidnapping, but he is too late as Carl and Gaear are already en route to Minneapolis and cannot be reached. As it turns out, Wade intends to buy the property himself anyway and give Jerry only a finder's fee. Meanwhile, Carl and Gaear arrive in Minneapolis and kidnap Jean, but on the way back to their cabin hideout, they are stopped by a state trooper outside Brainerd, Minnesota. When Carl's attempt to bribe the trooper fails and arouses suspicion, Gaear abruptly shoots the trooper, killing him. Moments later, a couple in a passing car witnesses Carl moving the trooper's body off the road and they drive away. Gaear chases after them until they swerve off the road and flip over, allowing Gaear to kill them.

The following morning, Marge Gunderson (Frances McDormand), a local police chief who is seven months pregnant, investigates the homicides. She deduces the chain of events and follows the leads that arise, including interviewing two prostitutes who had serviced the criminals at a truck stop two nights before. After being informed that the criminals telephoned Shep from the truck stop, she drives to Minneapolis, but acquires no information in interviews with both Shep and Jerry. While visiting Minneapolis, Marge reconnects with an old classmate, Mike Yanagita (Steve Park), who unsuccessfully tries to seduce her during dinner and then tells her that he has been lonely ever since his wife, Linda Cooksey, also from their high school, died from leukemia.

Jerry contacts Wade and Stan Grossman (Larry Brandenburg), Wade's accountant, claiming that the kidnappers insist on dealing only with Jerry. Wade and Stan accept this arrangement at first, but Wade later changes his mind and decides to deal with the kidnappers himself. Also, Carl angrily demands that Jerry give him and Gaear the entire $80,000 ransom as extra payment for the murders. Later, Shep tracks down Carl and beats him for potentially getting him in trouble with Marge. Furious, Carl phones Jerry and demands he make the drop off that night at a parking garage. However, Wade, who was eavesdropping on their conversation, storms out of the house instead of Jerry, with the ransom in his briefcase. When he arrives, Wade refuses to hand over the briefcase to Carl until Jean is returned. Angered by Wade's demands and unexpected appearance, Carl kills Wade, but not before Wade shoots Carl in the cheek. Jerry arrives at the scene's aftermath and puts Wade's body in his trunk. The next day, Carl discovers that the briefcase contains $1,000,000. He removes $80,000 to split with Gaear and buries the rest in the snow alongside the highway, marking the spot with an ice scraper. Carl then returns to the hideout and discovers that Gaear has killed Jean, claiming that she was too noisy. Following a dispute over the Ciera, Gaear murders Carl with an axe.

Before leaving Minneapolis, Marge learns from a friend that Mike had lied to her about his marriage and about Linda's death. She finds out that Mike has psychiatric problems and was actually stalking Linda. This revelation causes Marge to re-question Jerry, now believing that he too had lied to her about the missing car and its possible connection to the Brainerd homicides. Jerry becomes nervously uncooperative when Marge asks to speak with Wade and angrily storms out of his office, claiming to go check the lot for the missing car. Instead, he flees the dealership, which prompts Marge to contact the state police.

Later, after following up on a tip from a local bartender, who was suspicious over a drunken Carl's rantings a few days prior, Marge drives to Moose Lake and finds the stolen car. She catches Gaear feeding the last of Carl's body into a wood chipper. He attempts to run away across the frozen lake, but Marge shoots him in the leg and arrests him. Later, Jerry's location is traced to a motel outside Bismarck, North Dakota, where he is subdued and arrested while attempting to escape through a bathroom window.

That night, Marge and her husband, Norm (John Carroll Lynch), sit in bed together discussing Norm's mallard artwork, which has been selected as the design for a US postage stamp. Norm is disappointed that it will appear on the 3 stamp instead of the more prestigious 29 stamp, but Marge is very proud of his achievement, pointing out that every time the minimum postage is raised, the 3-center is going to be used to make up the difference. The two hold each other close while expressing excitement for the birth of their child in two months.