Woody, a pullstring cowboy toy, is the leader of a group of anthropomorphic toys owned by Andy Davis, which act lifeless in the presence of humans. With his family moving away one week before his birthday, Andy is given a week-early party to spend with his friends, while the toys stage a reconnaissance mission to discover Andy's new presents. Andy receives a spaceman action figure named Buzz Lightyear, whose impressive features make Woody, who has been Andy's favorite toy, fear being replaced by Buzz. Woody also becomes jealous when he notices Buzz getting attention from the other toys. Buzz, meanwhile, believes himself to be a real space ranger on a mission to return to his home planet, while Woody tries to tell him that he is just a toy.

As Andy prepares for a family outing at Pizza Planet, his favorite restaurant, his mother allows him to bring one toy along. Knowing Andy will choose Buzz, Woody attempts to trap Buzz behind the desk, but the plan goes awry when Buzz is accidentally knocked out the window. The other toys believe Woody intentionally pushed Buzz, and turn against him. With Buzz missing, Andy reluctantly takes Woody to Pizza Planet, but Buzz climbs onto the car and confronts Woody when they stop at a gas station. They fight and fall out of the van, which drives off leaving them behind. While Buzz still believes he is a real space ranger, Woody spots a Pizza Planet delivery truck and convinces him that it can take him to a space port. As Woody looks for Andy at Pizza Planet, Buzz sees a rocket-shaped skill game and jumps inside, mistaking it for a real spaceship. Woody chases Buzz, but Andy's toy-abusing neighbor, Sid Phillips, arrives and spots Buzz inside the machine, maneuvering the claw to grab him. Woody tries to rescue Buzz, but they both end up in Sid's possession.

At Sid's house, Woody tries to escape with Buzz before Andy's moving day, encountering Sid's abused toy creations and his vicious bull terrier Scud. Buzz sees a commercial for Buzz Lightyear action figures and attempts to prove he is real by jumping off a rail to fly, but instead falls and his left arm breaks off. Woody sees Andy's other toys out the window and tries convince them that Buzz is alive by waving Buzz's left arm, but this backfires and the toys believe Woody murdered Buzz. To Woody's surprise, Sid's toys reattach Buzz's arm. Sid, meanwhile, decides to blow up the space ranger with a firework rocket, but a thunderstorm delays the plan. That night, Woody tells a depressed Buzz he still has worth as a toy, reinvigorating his spirit. The next morning, Woody, with help from Sid's toys, escapes from Sid's room and rescues Buzz by coming to life in front of Sid. As Sid runs away in terror, Woody and Buzz bid farewell to Sid's toys and leave just as Andy's family drives away toward their new house.

They manage to climb onto the moving truck, but Scud chases after them and tries to pull Woody off the truck. Buzz tackles the dog and is left behind. Woody tries rescuing Buzz with Andy's RC car, but the other toys, still thinking Woody is eliminating fellow toys, attack the cowboy and toss him off the truck. Having evaded Scud, Buzz and RC pickup Woody and continue after the truck. Upon seeing Woody and Buzz together on RC, the other toys realize their mistake and try to help them get back aboard but RC's batteries become depleted, stranding them. Woody then ignites the rocket on Buzz's back and manages to throw RC into the truck before they soar into the air. Buzz opens his wings to free himself from the rocket before it explodes, gliding with Woody to land safely into a box in the van, right next to Andy.

On Christmas, at their new house, Woody and Buzz stage another reconnaissance mission to prepare for the new toy arrivals. As Woody jokingly asks what might be worse than Buzz, the two share a worried smile as they discover Andy's new gift is a puppy.