In the Mediterranean Sea, Italian fishermen rescue an unconscious American man (Matt Damon) floating adrift with two gunshot wounds in his back. The boat's skipper finds a tiny laser projector surgically implanted under the man's skin at the hip. When activated, it displays a safe deposit box number in Zrich. When he regains consciousness, the man discovers he has dissociative (or psychogenic) amnesia. It is soon revealed the amnesia is selective, as the man realizes he knows several languages and advanced combat skills. Much later he remembers fragments of the C.I.A. trauma-based programming which erased and replaced his identity. When the ship docks, he sets off to investigate the deposit box.

At CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, Deputy Director Ward Abbott (Brian Cox) learns that a CIA assassination attempt against exiled African dictator Nykwana Wombosi (Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje) failed. Meanwhile, in Zrich, the amnesiac man incapacitates two policemen using advanced hand-to-hand combat when they attempt to arrest him for vagrancy. The next morning, he visits the bank and opens the safe deposit box of the account number displayed by the implanted projector to find several passports containing his picture under different names, nationalities, and addresses, large amounts of assorted currencies, and a handgun. Taking an American passport name, Jason Bourne, he leaves with everything but the handgun.

As he leaves, a bank employee contacts Operation Treadstone, a CIA black operation program. Alexander Conklin (Chris Cooper), head of Treadstone, assures Abbott that he will clean up Jason's failure against Wombosi, activating three agents to take down Bourne: Castel, Manheim, and the Professor (Clive Owen). Chased by police, Jason is then pursued through a U.S. consulate but manages to evade capture. He encounters a German woman named Marie Helena Kreutz (Franka Potente), offering her $20,000 to drive him to the address in Paris on his French driving license.

Jason arrives at the address, an apartment, where he hits redial on his phone and is connected to the Hotel Regina. Jason enquires about some names: a "Jason Bourne" is not registered there, but "John Michael Kane" was and died two weeks ago in a car crash. Castel then ambushes Jason and Marie at the apartment, but Jason defeats him in a hand-to-hand fight. Marie finds wanted posters in Castel's bag with both her and Jason's pictures, while Castel jumps out of a window to his death. Marie, in shock, is later resolved to join Jason as they escape and investigate "John Michael Kane".

Wombosi had contacted police about the attempt on his life. To convince him that his assailant, Kane, is dead, Conklin plants a body in a Paris morgue but Wombosi is not fooled. The Professor then assassinates Wombosi as a result. Jason poses as Kane and gains documents about Wombosi's yacht and finds that an assailant was shot twice while escaping it. He concludes that he is the assassin, before seeking refuge in the French countryside with Marie and her ex lover Eamon (Tim Dutton) and his children. Conklin traces their location and the Professor arrives in the morning. Jason grabs Eamon's shotgun and outflanks the Professor in the fields, mortally wounding him. The Professor reveals their mutual connection to Treadstone before dying. Jason sends Marie away with Eamon. He contacts Conklin using the Professor's phone to arrange a meet, but Conklin brings back-up, so Jason instead tracks his vehicle to locate Treadstone's Paris safe house.

Jason breaks in and holds Conklin and logistics technician Nicolette "Nicky" Parsons (Julia Stiles) at gunpoint, beginning to remember his last mission through successive flashbacks. Kane was Jason's assumed identity during his mission to infiltrate Wombosi's yacht and kill him; but Jason aborts the assassination because several of Wombosi's children were awake nearby and silently staring at him. Jason is shot twice in the back while fleeing. Jason tells Conklin that he is leaving Treadstone and warns him not to follow him. After their altercation, both Conklin and Jason leave, with Jason fighting his way out through more agents. A nearby Manheim steps out of his car and kills Conklin. Abbott, in order to terminate Treadstone, ordered the hit. Before an oversight committee, Abbot dismisses Treadstone and announces a new project codenamed "Blackbriar". Some time later, Jason finds Marie renting out scooters to tourists on Mykonos, and the two reunite.