Edward (Richard Gere) and Connie Sumner (Diane Lane) are a middle-aged married couple living in a suburban New York City neighborhood with their 8-year-old son, Charlie (Erik Per Sullivan). Their relationship is strong and loving but lacking intimacy due to both of their busy work schedules. One afternoon, Connie goes shopping for supplies for Charlie's upcoming birthday party. Out in the street, she is caught in a heavy windstorm and runs into a handsome stranger (Olivier Martinez). They both fall and Connie scrapes her knees. He offers to treat her injuries in his apartment that they are coincidentally right outside of, and she accepts. Inside, the man introduces himself as Paul Martel, a 27-year-old Frenchman who buys and sells used books, and keeps them stored in a library in his apartment, which Connie admires. He makes several small advances toward her that make Connie feel uncomfortable and she decides to leave. Before doing so, Paul gives her a book of Persian poetry as a gift.

Connie tells Edward what happened after returning home, and he suggests they buy Paul "a bottle of cheap wine" as a thank you for helping her. She then finds Paul's phone number in the book he gave her and goes to a telephone booth at Grand Central Terminal to ask for his address so she can send the thank you gift, but he invites her to stop over at his place for coffee instead. Paul shows Connie a book in Braille and they share a moment where she closes her eyes as he pulls her hand across the text. Connie senses things are getting intimate, and excuses herself again. While she is cleaning dishes at home the following day, Connie is unable to stop thinking about Paul, and decides to visit him with a bag of muffins. After Connie and Paul have a dance, she stops at some point and says she can't continue, and she abruptly leaves his apartment. When she returns to retrieve her coat, Paul literally sweeps her off her feet and into his bedroom.

While on a train ride home, Connie recalls what happened with her and Paul, where, despite some initial reluctance on her part, she gives into Paul's seduction and has sex with him. She appears thrilled but guilty at the same time, knowing it is wrong to cheat on Edward, but can't help enjoy the feeling of being lusted after by a younger man. Connie uses her working at a charity event as an excuse to go visit Paul more frequently, but Edward finds holes in her stories when he speaks with friends. Bill Stone (Chad Lowe), one of Edward's employees, catches a glimpse of Connie and Paul kissing in a restaurant and, after being fired, makes a remark to Edward hinting at the affair. Connie buying more provocative clothing to impress Paul, which Edward also notices. After Connie and Paul have sex in the bathroom of a cafe, Connie's friend Tracy (Kate Burton) tells the story of when she cheated on her husband with another man and how affairs always end horribly, which disturbs Connie.

Edward is unable to let go of his suspicion, so he decides to hire private investigator, Frank Wilson (Dominic Chianese), to follow her. Frank returns with pictures of Connie and Paul leaving a movie theatre, which devastates Edward. Connie's visits with Paul become more frequent to the point that she is late to pick up Charlie from school. Following this incident, she realizes she can no longer hurt her family for her own selfish needs, so she decides to call Paul, but immediately hangs up when Charlie unexpectedly walks into the kitchen. Connie then decides it would be best to end the affair with Paul in person, but she spots him with another woman while on her way. After attacking Paul, their argument continues outside his apartment door, which ends in a tryst in the stairwell. At the same time, Edward is standing outside Paul's apartment building, planning to pay him a visit. Edward and Connie narrowly miss each other, where he is facing the wall of another building as Connie runs out to her car.

Edward goes to Paul's doorstep and confronts him, revealing that he is Connie's husband. After Paul invites him in, Edward is stunned to see a snow globe there, which he recognizes as his own gift to Connie for their anniversary, and Paul reveals that Connie then passed it on to him as a gift. When Paul offers Edward some water as he suffers a panic attack, he hits Paul with the snow globe, which causes a fracture in his skull that kills him. After cleaning up the blood and wrapping Paul's body in a rug, Edward hears Connie leaving a message on Paul's answering machine, saying that she must end the affair. Edward erases the message and leaves, putting Paul's body in the trunk of his car. He goes to meet up with Connie at Charlie's school in the midst of his school play. After the play, a man hits Edward's car, while the body is in the trunk. A panicked Edward closes the the trunk, upset and leaves the scene. In the ensuing days, Edward is unable to stop thinking about what he has done. He dumps Paul's body at a landfill and goes home.

When two police detectives arrive at the Sumner home, they explain that Paul's estranged wife had reported him missing and they had found Connie's phone number in his apartment, but she claims she only bought a book from him. A week later, the detectives return and tell Connie that they found Paul's body. She becomes upset while repeating her earlier story, and when police ask her how she first met Paul, she replies that she met Paul at a fundraiser. To Connie's apparent surprise, Edward backs her up and adds that he was there when she met Paul, which is untrue because it never happened. Connie is stunned that Edward has lied to the police. Later that night, Connie finds Frank's photos and realizes that Edward knows about the affair. After noticing the snow globe has been returned to their home, Connie deduces that Edward murdered Paul. Connie and Edward argue over the situation and, out of anger and frustration, Edward says that he hates Connie and wanted to kill her instead of killing Paul.

While looking underneath the snow globe in the days that follow, Connie discovers a hidden compartment containing a photograph of her, Edward, and an infant Charlie, with a loving anniversary message from Edward. As Connie is burning the photographs of her and Paul in the fireplace, Edward says he will turn himself in. Connie objects, saying they will find a way to live with this and move on. The two then appear to go about living a normal married life. While driving home, with Charlie sleeping in the backseat, Edward stops the car at a red traffic signal. Connie looks at Edward and whispers to him that they could leave the country and get new identities, and Edward agrees to the idea. However, Connie then starts crying, realizing that Edward has made a decision and is sticking with it. After they embrace, the light turns green, but Edward does not drive forward and instead continues to console Connie who is visibly sad. The car is seen stopped at an intersection, where there is a police station right next to it, implying that Edward decided to turn himself in for Paul's murder.