High school student Kale Brecht and his father Daniel get into a serious car accident while driving home from a fishing trip, and Daniel dies. One year later, Kale remains inconsolable after his father's death. Near the end of the school year, he is reprimanded by his Spanish teacher, Seor Gutierrez, and when Gutierrez brings up Kale's father, Kale attacks him. For this assault, he is sentenced by the sympathetic judge to a three-month house arrest period with an ankle monitor and a proximity sensor, which prohibit him from roaming beyond the boundaries of his house and yard. He then learns that one of the police officers monitoring him is his teacher's arrogant cousin. Initially, he satiates his boredom by playing video games, but shortly after, his mother Julie cancels his subscriptions to the iTunes Music Store and Xbox Live, and cuts the power cord of his television in order to get him to learn a hard lesson.

Kale's boredom leads him to spy on the neighborhood, including the two boys who occasionally play pranks on Kale, his next-door neighbor Robert Turner, and Ashley Carlson, the new girl in town. One night, Kale becomes suspicious of Robert Turner, who returns home in a 1967 Ford Mustang with a dented fender that matches the description given on a news report of an errant serial killer from Austin, Texas. Kale's best friend, Ronnie, visits to spy on Ashley, and when they accidentally alert her to their spying, she joins them in spying on Turner. Kale observes a woman Turner had picked up from a nightclub as she escapes the house in a panicked state, but she later appears to leave the home in her car. Ashley throws a party and teases Kale, knowing he is watching her. He plays music loudly to ruin it, and when Ashley comes over, Kale tells her all he has learned about her from his spying. The two make out, while blood is shown splattering on Turner's windows.

Later, as Kale and Ashley watch, Turner is seen dragging a heavy bag to his garage, which Ashley claims to have seen blood on. Kale insists that Ronnie assist him in spying on Turner, eventually leading to Ronnie's breaking into Turner's garage with a camera. Though he confirms the bag has blood and hair in it, the garage door closes, and Ronnie flees into the house. Kale leaves to rescue him but alerts the police when he leaves his property; the police search the garage and show Kale the bag contains roadkill. Kale's mother Julie then goes across the street to talk to Turner, while Ronnie is in her kitchen and Kale is watching the tape of Ronnie's running through Turner's house. Kale notices a dead body in plastic in a vent on the tape, as Turner knocks out Julie next door and then enters Kale's house, attacking Ronnie and Kale. Turner reveals his plan to frame Kale for the murder of his mother and Ronnie before committing suicide.

As Turner has Kale writing a suicide letter to Ashley, she enters the home, and the two fight off Turner and flee the house. Kale trips the bracelet to alert the police, then enters Turner's home; Ashley goes to the police in person. In a hidden room, Kale finds evidence of Turner's previous murders, including their credentials, and a room with surgical tools and freezers of ice. Officer Gutierrez arrives at the scene, but he is killed when Turner breaks his neck. Proceeding to the basement of the house, Kale falls through the floor and finds his mother bound and gagged underneath the foundation. Turner suddenly appears from behind Julie, and, in the ensuing confrontation, Kale stabs Turner with a pair of gardening sheers. In the aftermath, Kale's alert bracelet is removed for "good behavior", and he makes out with Ashley on his sofa, neither caring that Ronnie is video taping them.