Nine months after the events of the first film, organized crime has become the most irritating problem in Gotham City, so Batman (Christian Bale) and Police Lt. Jim Gordon (Gary Oldman) decide to include newly-elected district attorney Harvey Dent (Aaron Eckhart) in their plan to eradicate the mob organizing it. Although Dent is dating Rachel Dawes (Maggie Gylenhaal), Bruce Wayne is impressed with his idealism and offers to throw him a fundraiser.

Meanwhile, mob leaders Sal Maroni (Eric Roberts), Gambol (Michael Jai White), and the Chechen (Ritchie Coster) hold a videoconference with Chinese accountant Lau (Chin Han), who has hidden their funds from Gordon, Dent and Batman and fled to Hong Kong. A murderous psychopath called the Joker (Heath Ledger), who has recently stolen a stack of the funds from one of the local banks, interrupts the meeting and warns that Batman is unhindered by jurisdiction. He offers to kill Batman for half their money, but the mob bosses refuse, and Gambol puts a bounty on him. As a result, the Joker kills Gambol and takes control of his men. His prediction is proven correct, however, when Batman captures Lau and delivers him back to Gotham to testify against the mob.

The Joker announces that people will die each day unless Batman reveals his identity, first killing Police Commissioner Gillian B. Loeb (Colin McFarlane) and the judge presiding over the mob trials. He also targets Dent at the fundraiser, but Bruce hides Dent and suits up to stop the party-crashing while Rachel stalls the Joker. During the fight, the Joker tosses Rachel out the window, so instead of going after him, Batman saves her and ensures her that Dent is alright.

The next night, Batman and Gordon investigate the Joker's murder of two men who shared Dent's name as surnames and found that his next target would be Mayor Anthony Garcia (Nestor Carbonell), who would be hosting Loeb's funeral in the morning. The Joker and his cronies, disguised as the funeral's honor guards, aim their guns for their assassination on Garcia at the last minute, but Gordon foils it, apparently sacrificing himself in the process. Batman plans to reveal his identity at an upcoming press conference that he has Dent hold, but Dent instead names himself as Batman to protect the truth. He is taken into protective custody and pursued by the Joker across the city, so Batman rushes to his aid. Gordon, who faked his death, helps apprehend the Joker and is promoted to Commissioner.

Later that night, Dent and Rachel disappear. Batman interrogates the Joker and discovers that Dent and Rachel are held in two separate buildings rigged with two oil drum-activated bombs. The Joker reveals their locations, and Batman goes to Rachel's only to discover that the Joker has tricked him into finding Dent moments before both buildings explode, killing Rachel and scarring half of Dent's face. The Joker, on the other hand, detonates a phone-activated bomb sewn into a henchman who was captured with him in the police station and escapes with Lau.

The next morning, Coleman Reese (Joshua Harto), an accountant at Wayne Enterprises who deduces Batman's true identity, plans to reveal it on TV. The Joker kills Lau and the Chechen, then threatens to bomb a hospital unless Reese is killed. Gordon and Bruce protect Reese, who changes his mind. The Joker visits Dent in the hospital disguised as a nurse and convinces him to seek revenge. He then blows up the hospital and escapes with a bus-load of hostages.

Dent, now going by a long-time nickname, "Two-Face", starts to go after people responsible for Rachel's death, deciding their fates by flipping a coin. First, he kills a cop who had helped kidnap him, and then Maroni after interrogating the crime boss to expose the identity of Rachel's kidnapper. The Joker, meanwhile, rigs two ferries with explosives to escalate chaos; one ferry is full of citizens, the other full of prison inmates and guards. He then gives the passengers of each ferry the choice to blow the other up before midnight  otherwise, both ferries will explode. The passengers ultimately refuse, however.

Batman asks a reluctant Lucius Fox (Morgan Freeman) to use a city-wide tracking prototype device to find the Joker; Fox agrees, but says he will resign immediately afterward. The Joker dresses up hostages as his men, luring Gordon's SWAT team to strike them, so Batman fights off both the SWAT team and the Joker's men, rescuing the hostages. He then apprehends the Joker and disarms him of the detonator for both ferries, but the Joker gloats that he has won as Gotham will lose hope once Two-Face's rampage becomes public. The SWAT team arrives to take him into their custody.

Two-Face lures Gordon to the building where Rachel died and holds Gordon's family hostage. Batman confronts Two-Face, who judges the fates of himself, Batman, and Gordon's son (Nathan Gamble) with three coin flips. He shoots Batman, spares himself, then flips again to determine the boy's fate. Batman, who is wearing body armor, tackles Two-Face off the building, killing him and saving the boy. Batman then convinces Gordon to frame him for the murders so that Harvey Dent will remain a symbol of hope for the city. Gordon destroys the Bat-Signal and launches a manhunt for the Batman, Bruce's butler Alfred Pennyworth (Michael Caine) burns a letter written by Rachel to Bruce announcing her engagement to Dent, and Fox watches the signal tracker self-destruct.