Crop blight has made growing food on Earth nearly impossible, threatening the existence of humanity. Cooper, a widowed former NASA pilot, runs a farm with his father-in-law, son and daughter Murphy. Murphy believes her bedroom is haunted by a poltergeist. When the "ghost" creates a pattern of dust on the floor, Cooper realizes an unknown intelligence is using gravity to communicate, and interprets the pattern as geographic coordinates, which Cooper and Murphy follow to a secret NASA installation.

There, they meet Dr. Brand, a college professor of Cooper's. Brand reveals that a wormhole, apparently created by an alien intelligence, appeared near Saturn 48 years before and leads to a distant galaxy, with numerous potentially habitable planets. Twelve volunteers have gone through it, knowing they were unlikely to be able to return, each to assess a different planet's suitability as a new home for humanity. Three  Miller, Edmunds and Mann  have sent encouraging data from planets near Gargantua, a supermassive black hole. Brand recruits Cooper to pilot the spacecraft Endurance to evaluate as many of the planets as possible, while he works on a theory to harness gravity for propulsion, which would allow humanity to leave Earth (which he calls "Plan A"). However, should his efforts fail, the Endurance also carries 5,000 frozen embryos as "Plan B", to provide for humanity's survival. Cooper agrees to the plan, angering Murphy.

Cooper's crew consists of three scientists  Romilly, Doyle, and Brand's daughter Amelia  and robots TARS and CASE. Traversing the wormhole, they first head to Miller's planet, an ocean world where time is severely dilated; for each hour there, seven years pass on Earth. Romilly stays on the Endurance while the rest take a lander to the surface, where they find only Miller's wrecked lander in the shallow ocean. Suddenly, a massive tidal wave strikes, killing Doyle and waterlogging the lander's engines; when Cooper and Amelia return to Endurance, 23 years have elapsed for Romilly and Earth.

Murphy, now an adult, has been assisting Dr. Brand with his research. On his deathbed, he admits to her that he solved the equation long before and deemed Plan A impossible, and that he lied to everyone, pinning his hopes on Plan B. Murphy sends a message notifying Amelia of her father's death, then accuses her and Cooper of abandoning Earth. She continues researching, concluding that Plan A could work if somehow information could be obtained from observing Gargantua's singularity.

With limited fuel left, Cooper decides to go to Mann's planet, rather than Edmunds', as Mann is still transmitting. On arrival, they revive Mann, who has been in stasis. Mann assures the crew that while the frozen planet has an ammonia-laden atmosphere, the planetary surface is fit for human survival. However, when they are alone, Mann tries to kill Cooper, revealing that he falsified the data so he would be rescued. Mann then flees, intending to take the Endurance. Meanwhile, Romilly is killed by a booby trap Mann had set inside his own robot.

Amelia rescues Cooper, and they race to the Endurance, where Mann is attempting to dock. Mann defies Cooper's order not to open the airlock, which fails catastrophically. Mann is killed and the Endurance is severely damaged. Cooper manages to use the landing craft to stabilize the ship. Using the black hole's gravity as a slingshot, they set the ship on course to Edmunds' planet; but being close to a black hole, 51 years would pass on Earth.

Cooper jettisons himself and TARS into the black hole so that Amelia and CASE can complete the journey. Cooper and TARS plunge into the black hole, but emerge in a tesseract, which appears as a stream of bookshelves, with portals that look out into Murphy's bedroom at different times in her life. Cooper realizes that the tesseract and wormhole were created by humans from the future to enable him to communicate with Murphy through gravity waves, and that he is her "ghost". He relays data that TARS collected from the black hole in Morse code by manipulating the second hand of a watch he gave to Murphy before he left. Murphy uses the information to solve the remaining problem, completing "Plan A" and thus saving the population of Earth.

Cooper emerges from the wormhole and is rescued by the crew of a space habitat orbiting Saturn. Aboard, he reunites with Murphy, now elderly and near death. She convinces him to rejoin Amelia, who is with CASE on Edmunds' Planet, which was found to be habitable.