A British ghostwriter (Ewan McGregor), who is never named, is recruited by Rhinehart Inc., a large publishing company, to complete the memoirs of former Prime Minister Adam Lang (Pierce Brosnan). His predecessor on the project and Lang's long-term aide, Mike McAra, has recently died in an apparent accident. The writer travels to the fictional Massachusetts village of Old Haven on Martha's Vineyard, where Lang is staying with his wife, Ruth (Olivia Williams), in the house of Marty Rhinehart, the company owner, and a staff of servants and security personnel. The writer is checked into a small hotel. Lang's personal assistant (and implied mistress), Amelia Bly (Kim Cattrall), forbids him to take McAra's manuscript outside, emphasizing that it is a security risk. Rhinehart is allowing the new ghost four weeks to complete the book.

Shortly after the writer's arrival, Lang is accused by former Foreign Secretary Richard Rycart (Robert Pugh) of authorising the illegal seizure of suspected terrorists and handing them over for torture by the CIA, a possible war crime. Lang faces prosecution by the International Criminal Court unless he stays in the U.S. (or one of the few other countries that does not recognise the court's jurisdiction). As reporters and protesters swarm the island, the writer is moved into McAra's old room at Rhinehart's house, where personal belongings have not been cleared out yet. While Lang is away in Washington, the writer finds an envelope containing photographs of Lang's university days that suggest McAra might have stumbled across clues to a dark secret. Among the material is a handwritten phone number, which he rings and is answered by Rycart.

During a bicycle ride around the island, the writer encounters an old man (Eli Wallach) who tells him that the current couldn't have taken McAra's body from the ferry where he disappeared to the beach where it was discovered. He also reveals that a neighbour saw flashlights on the beach the night the body was discovered, but later fell downstairs and went into a coma. The writer is later intercepted by Ruth and her security guard, who take him back to the estate. There, while drinking a bottle of Rhinehart Winery wine, Ruth admits that Lang has never been very political, and until recently had always taken her advice. When the writer tells her the old man's story, she suddenly rushes out into the rainy night to "clear her head." Upon returning, she confides in the writer that Lang and McAra had argued the night before he died. She and the writer end up sleeping together.

The next morning, the writer decides he is getting too intimate with his subject and to move back to the hotel, taking the car that McAra used on his last journey. Unable to cancel the pre-programmed directions on the car's sat-nav, he suddenly decides to follow them. He arrives at Belmont, home of Professor Paul Emmett (Tom Wilkinson). Emmett denies anything more than a cursory acquaintance with Lang, despite the writer showing him two photographs of the pair, as well as another one on the wall of Emmett's study. When the writer tells Emmett that the sat-nav proves McAra visited him on the night he died, Emmett denies any knowledge and becomes evasive. The writer leaves Emmett's estate, and is forced to elude a car pursuing him. The writer boards the ferry back to Martha's Vineyard, but when he sees the pursuit car drive aboard, with two men looking for him, he flees the boat at the last moment and checks into a small motel by the ferry dock.

Not knowing to whom to turn, the writer again dials Rycart's cell phone, asking for help. While waiting for Rycart to pick him up at the motel, the writer does research on Emmett and links his think tank to a military contractor. He also finds leads that connect Emmett to the CIA. When Rycart arrives, he reveals that McAra gave him documents linking Lang to torture flights, and that McAra claimed he had found something new which he wrote about in the "beginning" of the manuscript. The men cannot, however, find anything in the early pages. The writer and Rycart further discuss Emmett's relationship with Lang, with Rycart recounting how Lang's decisions uniformly benefited U.S. interests when he was Prime Minister. When the writer is summoned to accompany Lang on his return flight by private jet, he confronts Lang and accuses him of being a CIA agent recruited by Emmett. Lang derides his suggestions.

Upon leaving the aircraft, Lang is assassinated by a British anti-war protester, who is in turn shot by Lang's bodyguards. Despite Lang's death, the writer is asked to complete the book for posthumous publication, as in light of the assassination it will be a certain best-seller. During the book's launch party in London, Amelia unwittingly tells the writer that the Americans tightened access to the book, as the "beginnings" contained evidence that threatened national security. She also tells him that Emmett was Ruth's tutor when she was a Fulbright scholar at Harvard. The writer realises that the clues were hidden in the original manuscript in the opening words of each chapter, and discovers the message, "Lang's wife Ruth was recruited as a CIA agent by Professor Paul Emmett of Harvard University." He concludes that Ruth shaped Lang's every political decision to benefit the U.S. under direction from the CIA.

The writer passes a note to Ruth telling of his discovery. She unfolds the note, and is devastated. When she sees the writer raising a glass, she is kept from following him by Emmett and other assistants. As the writer leaves the party he attempts to take a taxi, without success; then, as he crosses the street off-camera, a car accelerates in his direction, and sound effects and flying papers indicate that he has been hit.