The film starts in the present and in flashbacks looks at how Cindy and Dean met each other. Dean is a young high school dropout, working for a New York City moving company. Cindy is a pre-med student living with her constantly fighting parents and also caring for her grandmother in Pennsylvania. Cindy and Dean meet at Cindy's grandmother's nursing home while Dean is delivering a new resident's furniture. They begin to date. Cindy discovers she is pregnant, and tells Dean that the baby is most likely not his, as her previous boyfriend Bobby ejaculated during intercourse without the use of protection. Dean asks Cindy whether or not she wants to keep the baby. At an abortion clinic, Cindy decides at the last moment to cancel the procedure, and on the bus ride home, Dean tells her he doesn't mind if the child is not his, and that he wants to begin a family with her. Before the wedding, Bobby finds out about Dean, and beats him up.

This narrative of their courtship is intercut with that of a weekend some five years later. They live in rural Pennsylvania and Dean works at painting houses while Cindy is a nurse at a doctor's office. One evening, Dean insists on taking Cindy to a romantic motel two hours away to get away from their lives for a while. In the liquor store Cindy sees Bobby, who asks Cindy if she has ever cheated on her husband. She hesitates, but eventually says no. In the car Cindy tells Dean about seeing Bobby and Dean is upset. At the motel they get into an argument during sex. Cindy is called away early in the morning to work at the clinic. She leaves a note for Dean. At the clinic, Cindy's doctor boss talks to Cindy about a position he had offered her, and asks if she would move closer to work, suggesting that they would be able to spend time together on weekends. Visibly upset, Cindy says she previously thought he was offering her the position because she was good at her job.

Angered that Cindy left the motel without waking him, Dean shows up at the clinic, leading to an argument. Cindy says she wants a divorce. Dean gets into a violent altercation with Cindy's boss, asking if he's the "guy that has been emailing my wife". Cindy's boss fires Cindy. Outside the clinic, Dean tries to persuade her to give the relationship another chance, asking if she wants their daughter to grow up in a broken home. Cindy says she does not want Frankie to grow up with parents who are so hateful to each other. Dean reminds Cindy of their wedding vows, and Cindy apologizes. She asks Dean for "a little space". Dean is seen walking away from the house, with Frankie running after him to ask him to stay. Dean tells his daughter to go back to her mom. He tricks Frankie by challenging her to a race in an attempt to send her back to Cindy, and is seen walking away while Cindy picks up a crying and upset Frankie, who cries "I love him".