In 2077, the Earth has been devastated by war with an extraterrestrial invader, the Scavengers (Scavs). Humanity is relocating to Saturn's moon Titan via the Tet, a large tetrahedron-shaped space station. Gigantic offshore fusion energy generators drain the oceans to produce power for the colonists on Titan.

Stationed at Tower 49, Tech 49 Jack Harper (Tom Cruise) along with his teammate and lover Victoria "Vika" Olsen (Andrea Riseborough) are among the few humans left on Earth. Instructed by mission controller Sally (Melissa Leo) and assisted by drones, they protect the generators from attack by any remaining Scavs. Despite having had a memory wipe, Jack experiences visions of being on the observation deck of the Empire State Building with an unknown woman before the war.

Jack investigates the site where a module from a pre-invasion human spacecraft, the Odyssey, has crashed. He finds several working stasis chambers containing surviving humans in a hibernative state; including one that contains the woman from his visions, Julia (Olga Kurylenko). A drone arrives and begins to destroy the stasis chambers. Jack saves Julia, but the drone kills the remaining survivors. Later, Jack and Julia return to retrieve the flight recorder and are captured by Scavs. The Scavs turn out to be human survivors, not aliens. Their leader Malcolm Beech (Morgan Freeman) wants Jack's help to destroy the Tet by reprogramming a captured drone that contains ten stolen nuclear fuel cells. He tries to convince Jack that everything he knows is a lie, but Jack does not believe him; Beech releases them, saying the truth can be found in one of the forbidden radiation zones.

En route back to Tower 49, Jack and Julia go to the Empire State Building, Julia tells Jack that she was his wife. Their team, which included Vika, was heading towards Titan when they encountered the Tet, an alien ship, and was diverted to investigate it. Since she was in stasis, she doesn't know what happened after they left. They fly back to Tower 49 but Vika, monitoring their movements, refuses entry and reports to Sally that she and Jack are not "an effective team". Sally activates a disabled drone hidden inside the tower that kills Vika but is destroyed by Julia. Jack and Julia escape with the other drones in pursuit. Jack's ship is damaged and they jettison in the forbidden zone, which turns out to lack the warned-of radioactivity. They encounter Tech 52 Jack, an exact clone of Jack, and during a scuffle Julia is shot. Seeing Julia, Tech 52 Jack falters and experiences the same visions Tech 49 Jack experienced. After incapacitating and tying up Jack 52, Tech 49 Jack flies to Tower 52, finding a Vika clone there. He obtains medical supplies and returns to treat a wounded Julia.

After an evening at the lake-house Jack built, the two return to the Scavs. Beech reveals that the Tet is the hostile alien force, mining the Earth's resources while eliminating humanity. In 2017, the Tet arrived in orbit and destroyed the Moon, to devastate and disorient the human population: massive tidal waves and earthquakes destroyed most major cities, and millions more starved to death in the chaos. Soon afterwards the Tet landed waves of troopships, containing thousands of Jack clones programmed purely to kill. After the surviving humans were reduced to only a handful, about 50 years ago the Tet moved on to its second phase, using massive water pump machines to suck Earth's oceans dry for fuel, guarded by patrol drones which were serviced and maintained by a new generation of Jack and Victoria clones. "Sally" is just a computer generated image that the Tet uses to communicate with these ground crews, based on the head of the original Odyssey mission's ground crew.

Tracking Jack's biometric readings, the Tet sends drones to breach the complex, which Jack helps the others defend. Beech is gravely injured and the captured drone is damaged beyond repair. The humans try to regroup but fear an imminent attack. At Julia's suggestion, Jack communicates with the Tet via Sally, agreeing to turn over Julia to her. The Tet wants Julia because it believes that, as Jack's wife, a new set of clones based on her will make a more effective team than the Jack and Vika clones. After saying goodbye and placing Julia in a stasis chamber, Jack flies to the Tet while listening to the Odyssey's flight recorder and learning the fate of its commander, astronaut Jack Harper: he, Vika and Julia were crew members aboard the Odyssey, which was originally an exploration mission to Titan. The mission was re-routed by the real Sally at mission control to investigate the Tet, then near Saturn's orbit and therefore close to the original trajectory. Originally appearing inactive, the Tet began to pull the spacecraft towards it. Sensing danger, Jack jettisoned the sleep module, an emergency escape pod programmed to orbit Earth, to save the crew members in stasis. Jack and Vika were then captured by the Tet.

While entering the Tet, escorted by two drones, Jack glides past thousands of pods containing Jack and Vika clones. Upon final interrogation, he tells a doubting Sally he believes this is the only way Julia will survive and is granted access into the Tet's main control center. Now deep inside the Tet, Jack unloads and opens the sleep chamber which surprisingly contains Beech and a fuel cell bomb. They trigger the bomb, destroying the Tet and shutting down the attacking drones before they reach the human base. On Earth, Julia awakens from the stasis chamber at the lake-house in time to see the Tet destroyed. Three years later, Julia and her young daughter are living in the lake-house. Members of the human resistance arrive across the lake from the house and Jack Harper 52 emerges from the crowd smiling at Julia.