Engineer Aron Ralston (James Franco) drives to Utah's Canyonlands National Park for a day of canyoneering. On foot, he befriends hikers Kristi (Kate Mara) and Megan (Amber Tamblyn), and shows them an underground pool. After parting ways with the hikers, Ralston enters Blue John Canyon through a slot canyon. He slips and falls, and a boulder falls and traps his arm against the wall. Failing to move the boulder, he calls for help, but no one is around. He begins recording a video diary on his camera and using the larger blade on his pocket multi-tool to attempt to chip away at the boulder. He also rations his water and food.

As Ralston realizes his efforts to chip away at the boulder are futile, he attempts to move the boulder by setting up a pulley system using his climbing rope, but to no avail. He then attempts to cut into his arm, but finds the knife is too blunt to break his skin. He stabs his arm, but realizes he will not be able to cut through the bone. Out of water, he is forced to drink his urine. His video logs become desperate as he feels himself dying. He hallucinates about escape, relationships, and past experiences, including a former lover (Clmence Posy), family (Lizzy Caplan, Treat Williams, Kate Burton), and the hikers. He reflects that everything he has done has led him to this ordeal. After five days, Ralston sees a vision of a little boy.

Ralston realizes that by using his knowledge of torque and applying enough force to his forearm, he can break the radius and ulna bones, letting him amputate his arm. He severs his arm with the smaller, less dull knife on the multi-tool. He fashions a crude tourniquet out of the insulation for his CamelBak tube, uses a carabiner to tighten it, and cuts his arm off. He wraps the stump of his arm and takes a picture of the boulder that trapped him. He makes his way out of the canyon and rappels down a 65-foot rockface, drinks from a pool of rainwater, and meets a family on a day hike. Ralston is picked up by a Utah Highway Patrol helicopter. Ralston recovers, continues his climbing and mountaineering hobbies, and starts a family.