In March 1996, two expeditions arrive in Lukla in preparation for climbing Mount Everest. Rob Hall (Jason Clarke) is one of three guides for Adventure Consultants whose several clients include Beck Weathers (Josh Brolin), an experienced climber, Doug Hansen (John Hawkes), a former mailman pursuing his dream, and Yasuko Namba (Naoko Mori), who had previously climbed six of the Seven Summits and was attempting to become the oldest woman to summit Everest. Scott Fischer (Jake Gyllenhaal) is the chief guide for Mountain Madness. At Everest Base Camp, the two expeditions meet Helen Wilton (Emily Watson), the base camp manager, who communicates with them all via walkie-talkies while they climb.

Worried about crowding on the mountain, Rob tries to persuade another group to climb on a different date, but they refuse. On May 10, Rob's group departs Camp IV before dawn, planning to reach the top and turn around by 2:00 p.m., the latest safe time that will allow them to reach Camp IV before nightfall. However, the group is delayed for an hour after discovering guide ropes are not yet installed on upper reaches of the climb. Beck has trouble with his vision and sits down on the Balcony. Rob tells him to turn back if his condition does not improve in a half hour.

Rob reaches the summit on time, but many others do not because of delays at the Hillary Step bottleneck. Yasuko arrives and plants her Japanese flag in the snow, thanking God and celebrating with Rob. About 3:00 p.m., a blizzard strikes. On his way down, Rob encounters Doug struggling just above the Hillary Step and orders him to turn back. Doug says he will not get the chance again and insists on continuing. Rob reluctantly agrees and together they reach the summit. Scott arrives about 3:45 p.m., exhausted and increasingly ill from high-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE).

Supplemental oxygen for climbers is running out as the blizzard intensifies, and no full emergency tanks are stored where Rob had asked. Descending with Rob, Doug becomes semi-conscious. Rob radios Helen to send someone up with oxygen and water. Doug, left alone briefly by Rob, unbuckles his carabiner from the guide rope in his hypoxia daze and walks along the extremely narrow path on the mountainside. A moment later, the wind blows him off the ridge to his death. Meanwhile, several descending climbers reach Beck, still sitting on the Balcony and barely able to see. The group becomes lost when the blizzard obliterates the trail. Three in the group go for help, leaving Beck and Yasuko behind.

Adventure Consultants Guide Andy "Harold" Harris reaches Rob with the oxygen, only to be told that Doug is "gone." The blizzard prevents the two from descending. Andy suffers hypoxia and hallucinates. He strips off his outer clothes, wanders away and falls to his death. After a night exposed to the storm, Rob radios Helen, telling her he is still at the top of the Hillary Step, but Doug and Andy are both gone. He says his hands and feet are frozen and his oxygen regulator is blocked by ice. Helen calls Rob's pregnant wife Jan, hoping Rob will respond to her voice and begin descending. Jan tells Rob he must start moving. Rob tells her he is cold but comfortable and asks her to name their baby Sarah, a name she originally was against. He dies soon after.

Scott, alone below the summit, cannot descend and dies. Many climbers reach Camp IV with news that Beck and Yasuko are stranded, but the weather is too dangerous for a rescue. Helen calls Beck's wife, Peach, and informs her of the situation. Beck miraculously regains consciousness, discovers Yasuko has died, and stumbles back to Camp IV alone, to the astonishment of everyone. He is severely frostbitten and desperately needs medical help. His wife calls the American Embassy and organizes a helicopter rescue. The mission is dangerous because of the thin air, but the aircrew successfully makes one of the highest altitude helicopter medical evacuations.

Returning home, Helen and several others have an emotional reunion with Jan, who later gives birth and names her daughter Sarah. Beck returns home to his family, heavily bandaged. An epilogue text states that Beck lost both hands and nose to severe frostbite and that Rob's body remains on Everest.